1967
olympic games
article
talk
read
view source
view history
tools
page semi-protected
from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
this article is about the modern games in general. for the most recent games in beijing, china, see 2022 winter olympics. for the upcoming games in paris, france, see 2024 summer olympics. for the ancient greek games, see ancient olympic games. for other uses, see olympic (disambiguation).
olympic rings
main topics
bidsboycottsceremoniescharterhost citiesifsiocmedalmedal tablesmedalistsnocsolympismpierre de coubertin medalscandals and controversiessportssymbolstelevisiontorch relaysvenueswomen participation
games
summerwinter
youth
africanasianeuropeanpacificpan-american
ancientintercalated
motorsport
vte
the modern olympic games or olympics (french: jeux olympiques)[a] are the leading international sporting events featuring summer and winter sports competitions in which thousands of athletes from around the world participate in a variety of competitions. the olympic games are considered the world's foremost sports competition with more than 200 teams, representing sovereign states and territories, participating. the olympic games are normally held every four years, and since 1994, have alternated between the summer and winter olympics every two years during the four-year period.
their creation was inspired by the ancient olympic games (ancient greek: ὀλυμπιακοί ἀγῶνες), held in olympia, greece from the 8th century bc to the 4th century ad. baron pierre de coubertin founded the international olympic committee (ioc) in 1894, leading to the first modern games in athens in 1896. the ioc is the governing body of the olympic movement (which encompasses all entities and individuals involved in the olympic games) with the olympic charter defining its structure and authority.
the evolution of the olympic movement during the 20th and 21st centuries has resulted in several changes to the olympic games. some of these adjustments include the creation of the winter olympic games for snow and ice sports, the paralympic games for athletes with disabilities, the youth olympic games for athletes age, the five continental games (pan american, african, asian, european, and pacific), and the world games for sports that are not contested in the olympic games. the ioc also endorses the deaflympics and the special olympics. the ioc has needed to adapt to a variety of economic, political, and technological advancements. the abuse of amateur rules by the eastern bloc nations prompted the ioc to shift away from pure amateurism, as envisioned by coubertin, to the acceptance of professional athletes participating at the games. the growing importance of mass media has created the issue of corporate sponsorship and general commercialisation of the games. world wars led to the cancellation of the 1916, 1940, and 1944 olympics; large-scale boycotts during the cold war limited participation in th olympics; and the 2020 olympics were postponed until 2021 as a result of the covid-19 pandemic.
the olympic movement consists of international sports federations (ifs), national olympic committees (nocs), and organising committees for each specific olympic games. as the decision-making body, the ioc is responsible for choosing the host city for each games, and organises and funds the games according to the olympic charter. the ioc also determines the olympic programme, consisting of the sports to be contested at the games. there are several olympic rituals and symbols, such as the olympic flag and torch, as well as the opening and closing ceremonies. over 14,000 athletes competed at the 2020 summer olympics and 2022 winter olympics combined, in 40 different sports and 448 events. the first-, second-, and third-place finishers in each event receive olympic medals: gold, silver, and bronze, respectively.
the games have grown so much that nearly every nation is now represented; colonies and overseas territories are allowed to field their own teams. this growth has created numerous challenges and controversies, including boycotts, doping, bribery, and terrorism. every two years, the olympics and its media exposure provide athletes with the chance to attain national and sometimes international fame. the games also provide an opportunity for the host city and country to showcase themselves to the world.
ancient olympics
main article: ancient olympic games
stadium in olympia, greece
the ancient olympic games were religious and athletic festivals held every four years at the sanctuary of zeus in olympia, greece. competition was among representatives of several city-states and kingdoms of ancient greece. these games featured mainly athletic but also combat sports such as wrestling and the pankration, horse and chariot racing events. it has been widely written that during the games, all conflicts among the participating city-states were postponed until the games were finished. this cessation of hostilities was known as the olympic peace or truce. this idea is a modern myth because the greeks never suspended their wars. the truce did allow those religious pilgrims who were travelling to olympia to pass through warring territories unmolested because they were protected by zeus.
the origin of the olympics is shrouded in mystery and legend; one of the most popular myths identifies heracles and his father zeus as the progenitors of the games. according to legend, it was heracles who first called the games "olympic" and established the custom of holding them every four years. the myth continues that after heracles completed his twelve labours, he built the olympic stadium as an honour to zeus. following its completion, he walked in a straight line for 200 steps and called this distance a "stadion" (ancient greek: στάδιον, latin: stadium, "stage"), which later became a unit of distance. the most widely accepted inception date for the ancient olympics is 776 bc; this is based on inscriptions, found at olympia, listing the winners of a footrace held every four years starting in 776 bc. the ancient games featured running events, a pentathlon (consisting of a jumping event, discus and javelin throws, a foot race, and wrestling), boxing, wrestling, pankration, and equestrian events. tradition has it that coroebus, a cook from the city of elis, was the first olympic champion.
the olympics were of fundamental religious importance, featuring sporting events alongside ritual sacrifices honouring both zeus (whose famous statue by phidias stood in his temple at olympia) and pelops, divine hero and mythical king of olympia. pelops was famous for his chariot race with king oenomaus of pisatis. the winners of the events were admired and immortalised in poems and statues. the games were held every four years, and this period, known as an olympiad, was used by greeks as one of their units of time measurement. the games were part of a cycle known as the panhellenic games, which included the pythian games, the nemean games, and the isthmian games.
the olympic games reached the height of their success in the 6th and 5th centuries bc, but then gradually declined in importance as the romans gained power and influence in greece. while there is no scholarly consensus as to when the games officially ended, the most commonly held date is 393 ad, when the emperor theodosius i decreed that all pagan cults and practices be eliminated.[b] another date commonly cited is 426 ad, when his successor, theodosius ii, ordered the destruction of all greek temples.
modern games: list of olympic games host cities
forerunners
baron pierre de coubertin
various uses of the term "olympic" to describe athletic events in the modern era have been documented since the 17th century. the first such event was the cotswold games or "cotswold olimpick games", an annual meeting near chipping campden, england, involving various sports. it was first organised by the lawyer robert dover betwee, with several later celebrations leading up to the present day. the british olympic association, in its bid for the 2012 olympic games in london, mentioned these games as "the first stirrings of britain's olympic beginnings".
l'olympiade de la république, a national olympic festival held annually fro in revolutionary france also attempted to emulate the ancient olympic games. the competition included several disciplines from the ancient greek olympics. the 1796 games also marked the introduction of the metric system into sport.
1834 handbill, written in phonetic vernacular, advertising "ho-limpyc gaymes" in oswestry, shropshire, england
i, olympic games were held in ramlösa [sv] (olympiska spelen i ramlösa), and an additional in stockholm, sweden in 1843, all organised by gustaf johan schartau and others. at most 25,000 spectators saw the games.
in 1850, an olympian class was started by william penny brookes at much wenlock, in shropshire, england. in 1859, brookes changed the name to the wenlock olympian games. this annual sports festival continues to this day. the wenlock olympian society was founded by brookes o.
betwee, liverpool held an annual grand olympic festival. devised by john hulley and charles pierre melly, these games were the first to be wholly amateur in nature and international in outlook, although only 'gentlemen amateurs' could compete. the programme of the first modern olympiad in athens in 1896 was almost identical to that of the liverpool olympics. in 1865 hulley, brookes and e.g. ravenstein founded the national olympian association in liverpool, a forerunner of the british olympic association. its articles of foundation provided the framework for the international olympic charter. in 1866, a national olympic games in great britain was organised at london's crystal palace.
revival
evangelos zappas
greek interest in reviving the olympic games began with the greek war of independence from the ottoman empire in 1821. it was first proposed by poet and newspaper editor panagiotis soutsos in his poem "dialogue of the dead", published in 1833. evangelos zappas, a wealthy greek-romanian philanthropist, first wrote to king otto of greece, in 1856, offering to fund a permanent revival of the olympic games. zappas sponsored the first olympic games in 1859, which was held in an athens city square. athletes participated from greece and the ottoman empire. zappas funded the restoration of the ancient panathenaic stadium so that it could host all future olympic games.
the stadium hosted olympics i. thirty thousand spectators attended that games in 1870, though no official attendance records are available for the 1875 games. in 1890, after attending the olympian games of the wenlock olympian society, baron pierre de coubertin was inspired to found the international olympic committee (ioc). coubertin built on the ideas and work of brookes and zappas with the aim of establishing internationally rotating olympic games that would occur every four years. he presented these ideas during the first olympic congress of the newly created international olympic committee. this meeting was held fro june 1894, at the university of paris. on the last day of the congress, it was decided that the first olympic games to come under the auspices of the ioc would take place in athens in 1896. the ioc elected the greek writer demetrius vikelas as its first president.
1896 games
main article: 1896 summer olympics
opening ceremony in the panathinaiko stadium
the first games held under the auspices of the ioc was hosted in the panathenaic stadium in athens in 1896. the games brought together 14 nations and 241 athletes who competed in 43 events. zappas and his cousin konstantinos zappas had left the greek government a trust to fund future olympic games. this trust was used to help finance the 1896 games. george averoff contributed generously for the refurbishment of the stadium in preparation for the games. the greek government also provided funding, which was expected to be recouped through the sale of tickets and from the sale of the first olympic commemorative stamp set.
greek officials and the public were enthusiastic about the experience of hosting an olympic games. this feeling was shared by many of the athletes, who even demanded that athens be the permanent olympic host city. the ioc intended for subsequent games to be rotated to various host cities around the world. the second olympics was held in paris.
changes and adaptations
main article: summer olympic games
francis field of washington university in st. louis during the 1904 summer olympics
after the success of the 1896 games, the olympics entered a period of stagnation which threatened its survival. the olympic games held at the paris exposition in 1900 and the louisiana purchase exposition at st. louis in 1904 failed to attract much participation or notice. of the 650 athletes in the 1904 olympics, 580 were american; the winner of the marathon was later disqualified upon discovery of a photograph of him riding in a car during the race. the games rebounded with the 1906 intercalated games (so-called because they were the second olympics to take place within the third olympiad), which were held in athens. these games attracted a broad international field of participants and generated a great deal of public interest, marking the beginning of a rise in both the popularity and the size of the olympics. the 1906 games were officially recognised by the ioc at the time (although not any longer), and no intercalated games have been held since.
winter games
main article: winter olympic games
ice hockey game during the 1928 winter olympics at st. moritz
the winter olympics was created to feature snow and ice sports that were logistically impossible to hold during the summer games. figure skating (i) and ice hockey (in 1920) were featured as olympic events at the summer olympics. the ioc desired to expand this list of sports to encompass other winter activities. at the 1921 olympic congress in lausanne, it was decided to hold a winter version of the olympic games. a winter sports week (it was actually 11 days) was held in 1924 in chamonix, france, in connection with the paris games held three months later; this event became the first winter olympic games. although it was intended that the same country host both the winter and summer games in a given year, this idea was quickly abandoned. the ioc mandated that the winter games be celebrated every four years in the same year as their summer counterpart. this tradition was upheld through the 1992 games in albertville, france; after that, beginning with the 1994 games, the winter olympics were held every four years, two years after each summer olympics.
paralympics
main article: paralympic games
1964 summer paralympics in tokyo
in 1948, sir ludwig guttmann, determined to promote the rehabilitation of soldiers after world war ii, organised a multi-sport event between several hospitals to coincide with the 1948 london olympics. originally known as the stoke mandeville games, guttmann's event became an annual sports festival. over the next 12 years, guttmann and others continued their efforts to use sports as an avenue to healing.
in 1960, guttmann brought 400 athletes to rome to compete in the "parallel olympics", which ran in parallel with the summer olympics and came to be known as the first paralympics. since then, the paralympics have been held in every olympic year and, starting with the 1988 summer games in seoul, the host city for the olympics has also played host to the paralympics.[c] the international olympic committee (ioc) and the international paralympic committee (ipc) signed an agreement in 2001 which guaranteed that host cities would be contracted to manage both the olympic and paralympic games. the agreement came into effect at the 2008 summer games in beijing, and at the 2010 winter games in vancouver.
two years before the 2012 games, the locog chairman lord coe made the following statement about the paralympics and olympics in london:
we want to change public attitudes towards disability, celebrate the excellence of paralympic sport and to enshrine from the very outset that the two games are an integrated whole.
youth games
main article: youth olympic games
in 2010, the olympic games were complemented by the youth games, which give athletes between the ages o the chance to compete. the youth olympic games were conceived by ioc president jacques rogge in 2001 and approved during the 119th congress of the ioc. the first summer youth games were held in singapore fro august 2010, while the inaugural winter games were hosted in innsbruck, austria, two years later. these games will be shorter than the senior games; the summer version will last twelve days, while the winter version will last nine days. the ioc allows 3,500 athletes and 875 officials to participate at the summer youth games, and 970 athletes and 580 officials at the winter youth games. the sports to be contested will coincide with those scheduled for the senior games, however there will be variations on the sports including mixed noc and mixed gender teams as well as a reduced number of disciplines and events.
21st-century games
the summer olympics have grown from 241 participants representing 14 nations in 1896, to more than 11,200 competitors representing 207 nations in 2016. the scope and scale of the winter olympics is smaller; for example, pyeongchang hosted 2,922 athletes from 92 nations in 2018. most of the athletes and officials are housed in the olympic village for the duration of the games. this accommodation centre is designed to be a self-contained home for all olympic participants, and is furnished with cafeterias, health clinics, and locations for religious expression.
the ioc has allowed the formation of national olympic committees (nocs) to represent individual nations. these do not meet the strict requirements for political sovereignty that other international organisations demand. as a result, colonies and dependencies are permitted to compete at olympic games, examples being territories such as puerto rico, bermuda, and hong kong, all of which compete as separate nations despite being legally a part of another country. the current version of the olympic charter allows for the establishment of new nocs to represent nations that qualify as "an independent state recognised by the international community". consequently, the ioc did not allow the formation of nocs for sint maarten and curaçao when they gained the same constitutional status as aruba in 2010, although the ioc had recognised the aruban olympic committee in 1986. since 2012, athletes from the former netherlands antilles have had the option to represent either the netherlands or aruba.
cost of the games: cost of the olympic games
the oxford olympics study 2016 found that, since 1960, sports-related costs for the summer games were on average us$5.2 billion and for the winter games $3.1 billion. these figures do not include wider infrastructure costs like roads, urban rail, and airports, which often cost as much or more than the sports-related costs. the most expensive summer games were beijing 2008 at us$40–44 billion, and the most expensive winter games were sochi 2014 at us$51 billion. as of 2016, costs per athlete were, on average, us$599,000 for the summer games and $1.3 million for the winter games; for london 2012, the cost per athlete was $1.4 million, and the figure was $7.9 million for sochi 2014.
where ambitious construction for the 1976 games in montreal and the 1980 games in moscow had burdened organisers with expenses greatly in excess of revenues, los angeles strictly controlled expenses for the 1984 games by using existing facilities that were paid for by corporate sponsors. the olympic committee led by peter ueberroth used some of the profits to endow the la84 foundation to promote youth sports in southern california, educate coaches and maintain a sports library. the 1984 summer olympics are often considered the most financially successful modern olympics and a model for future games.
budget overruns are common for the games. average overrun for games sinc% in real terms, which means that actual costs turned out to be on average 2.56 times the budget that was estimated at the time of winning the bid to host the games. montreal 1976 had the highest cost overrun for summer games, and for any games, at 720%; lake placid 1980 had the highest cost overrun for winter games, at 324%. london 2012 had a cost overrun of 76%, soch%.
it has been documented that cost and cost overrun for the games follow a power-law distribution, which means that, first, the games are prone to large cost overruns and, second, it is only a matter of time until an overrun occurs that is larger than the largest to date. in short, hosting the games is economically and financially extremely risky.
economic and social impact on host cities and countries
this section has multiple issues. please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (learn how and when to remove these template messages)
this section contains weasel words: vague phrasing that often accompanies biased or unverifiable information. (may 2021)
this section relies excessively on references to primary sources. (may 2021)
many economists[who?] are sceptical about the economic benefits of hosting the olympic games, emphasising that such "mega-events" often have large costs while yielding relatively few tangible benefits in the long run. conversely hosting (or even bidding for) the olympics appears to increase the host country's exports, as the host or candidate country sends a signal about trade openness when bidding to host the games. moreover, research suggests that hosting the summer olympics has a strong positive effect on the philanthropic contributions of corporations headquartered in the host city, which seems to benefit the local nonprofit sector. this positive effect begins in the years leading up to the games and might persist for several years afterwards, although not permanently. this finding suggests that hosting the olympics might create opportunities for cities to influence local corporations in ways that benefit the local nonprofit sector and civil society.
the games have also had significant negative effects on host communities; for example, the centre on housing rights and evictions reports that the olympics displaced more than two million people over two decades, often disproportionately affecting disadvantaged groups. the 2014 winter olympics in sochi were the most expensive olympic games in history, costing in excess of us$50 billion. according to a report by the european bank for reconstruction and development that was released at the time of the games, this cost will not boost russia's national economy, but may attract business to sochi and the southern krasnodar region of russia in the future as a result of improved services. but by december 2014, the guardian stated that sochi "now feels like a ghost town", citing the spread-out nature of the stadiums and arenas, the still-unfinished construction, and the overall effects of russia's political and economic turmoil. furthermore, at least four cities withdrew their bids for the 2022 winter olympics, citing the high costs or the lack of local support, resulting in only a two-city race between almaty, kazakhstan and beijing, china. thus in july 2016, the guardian stated that the biggest threat to the future of the olympics is that very few cities want to host them. bidding for the 2024 summer olympics also became a two-city race between paris and los angeles, so the ioc took the unusual step of simultaneously awarding both the 2024 games to paris and the 2028 games to los angeles. both the bids were praised for planning to use a record-breaking number of existing and temporary facilities.
international olympic committee: international olympic committee
the olympic movement encompasses a large number of national and international sporting organisations and federations, recognised media partners, as well as athletes, officials, judges, and every other person and institution that agrees to abide by the rules of the olympic charter. as the umbrella organisation of the olympic movement, the international olympic committee (ioc) is responsible for selecting the host city, overseeing the planning of the olympic games, updating and approving the olympic sports programme, and negotiating sponsorship and broadcasting rights.
the olympic movement is made of three major elements:
international federations (ifs) are the governing bodies that supervise a sport at an international level. for example, the international federation of association football (fifa) is the if for association football, and the fédération internationale de volleyball is the international governing body for volleyball. there are currently 35 ifs in the olympic movement, representing each of the olympic sports.
national olympic committees (nocs) represent and regulate the olympic movement within each country. for example, the russian olympic committee (roc) is the noc of the russian federation. there are currently 206 nocs recognised by the ioc.
organising committees for the olympic games (ocogs) are temporary committees responsible for the organisation of each olympic games. ocogs are dissolved after each games once the final report is delivered to the ioc.
french and english are the official languages of the olympic movement. the other language used at each olympic games is the language of the host country (or languages, if a country has more than one official language apart from french or english). every proclamation (such as the announcement of each country during the parade of nations in the opening ceremony) is spoken in these three (or more) languages, or the main two depending on whether the host country is an english or french speaking country: french is always spoken first, followed by an english translation, and then the dominant language of the host nation (when this is not english or french).
allegations of bribery and corruption
the ioc has often been accused of being an intractable organisation, with several life members on the committee. the presidential terms of avery brundage and juan antonio samaranch were especially controversial. brundage fought strongly for amateurism and against the commercialisation of the olympic games, even as these attitudes came to be seen as incongruous with the realities of modern sports. the advent of state-sponsored athletes from the eastern bloc countries further eroded the ideology of the pure amateur, as it placed self-financed amateurs of western countries at a disadvantage. brundage was accused of racism—for resisting the exclusion of apartheid south africa—and antisemitism. under the samaranch presidency, the office was accused of both nepotism and corruption. samaranch's ties with the franco regime in spain were also a source of criticism.
in 1998, it was reported that several ioc members had taken gifts from members of the salt lake city bid committee for the hosting of the 2002 winter olympics. there were soon four independent investigations underway: by the ioc, the united states olympic committee (usoc), the salt lake organizing committee (sloc), and the united states department of justice (doj). although nothing strictly illegal had occurred, it was felt that the acceptance of the gifts was morally dubious. as a result of the investigation, ten members of the ioc were expelled and a further ten sanctioned. stricter rules were adopted for future bids, and caps were introduced to define how much ioc members could accept from bid cities. additionally, new term and age limits were put into place for ioc membership, and fifteen former olympic athletes were added to the committee. nevertheless, from sporting and business standpoints, the 2002 olympics were one of the most successful winter games in history; records were set in both the broadcasting and marketing programs. over 2 billion viewers watched more than 13 billion viewer-hours. the 2002 games were also a financial success, raising more money with fewer sponsors than any prior olympic games, leaving sloc with a surplus of $40 million. this excess revenue was used to create the utah athletic foundation (also known as the utah olympic legacy foundation), which maintains and operates many of the surviving olympic venues.
it was reported in 1999 that the nagano olympic bid committee had spent approximately $14 million on entertaining the 62 ioc members and many of their associates. the precise figures are unknown since nagano destroyed the financial records after the ioc requested that the entertainment expenditures should not be made public.
a bbc documentary entitled panorama: buying the games, which aired in august 2004, investigated the taking of bribes in the bidding process for the 2012 summer olympics. the documentary claimed that it was possible to bribe ioc members into voting for a particular candidate city. after being narrowly defeated in their bid for the 2012 games, parisian mayor bertrand delanoë specifically accused the british prime minister tony blair and the london bid committee, headed by former olympic champion sebastian coe, of breaking the bid rules. he cited french president jacques chirac as a witness; chirac gave guarded interviews concerning his involvement but the allegation was never fully explored. turin's 2006 winter olympic bid was also clouded by controversy. a prominent ioc member, marc hodler, closely connected to the rival bid of sion, alleged bribery of ioc officials by members of the turin organising committee. these accusations led to a wide-ranging investigation, and also served to sour many ioc members against sion's bid which potentially helped turin to capture the host city nomination.
commercialisation
under national organising committees
the olympic games have been commercialised to various degrees since the inaugural 1896 summer olympics in athens, when a number of companies paid for advertising, including kodak. in 1908, oxo, odol [de] mouthwash, and indian foot powder became official sponsors of the london olympic games. coca-cola first sponsored the summer olympics in 1928, and has remained an olympic sponsor ever since. before the ioc took control of sponsorship, the nocs had responsibility for negotiating their own contracts for sponsorship and use of the olympic symbols.
under ioc control
the ioc originally resisted funding by corporate sponsors. it was not until the retirement of ioc president avery brundage, in 1972, that the ioc began to explore the potential of the television medium and the lucrative advertising markets available to them. under the leadership of juan antonio samaranch the games began to shift toward international sponsors who sought to link their products to the olympic brand.
budget
during the first half of the 20th century, the ioc ran on a small budget. as president of the ioc fro, avery brundage rejected all attempts to link the olympics with commercial interest. brundage believed the lobby of corporate interests would unduly impact the ioc's decision-making. brundage's resistance to this revenue stream meant the ioc left organising committees to negotiate their own sponsorship contracts and use the olympic symbols. when brundage retired the ioc had us$2 million in assets; eight years later the ioc coffers had swelled to us$45 million. this was primarily due to a shift in ideology toward expansion of the games through corporate sponsorship and the sale of television rights. when juan antonio samaranch was elected ioc president in 1980 his desire was to make the ioc financially independent.
the 1984 summer olympics became a watershed moment in olympic history. the los angeles-based organising committee, led by peter ueberroth, was able to generate a surplus of us$225 million, which was an unprecedented amount at that time. the organising committee had been able to create such a surplus in part by selling exclusive sponsorship rights to select companies. the ioc sought to gain control of these sponsorship rights. samaranch helped to establish the olympic programme (top) in 1985, in order to create an olympic brand. membership in top was, and is, very exclusive and expensive. fees cost us$50 million for a four-year membership. members of top received exclusive global advertising rights for their product category, and use of the olympic symbol, the interlocking rings, in their publications and advertisements.
effect of television
a cartoon from the 1936 olympics imagines the year 2000 when spectators will have been replaced by television and radio, their cheers coming from loudspeakers.
the 1936 summer olympics in berlin were the first games to be broadcast on television, though only to local audiences. the 1956 winter olympics in italy were the first internationally televised olympic games, and the broadcasting rights for the following winter games in california were sold for the first time to specialised television broadcasting networks—cbs paid us$394,000 for the american rights. in the following decades, the olympics became one of the ideological fronts of the cold war, and the international olympic committee wanted to take advantage of this heightened interest via the broadcast medium. the sale of broadcast rights enabled the ioc to increase the exposure of the olympic games, thereby generating more interest, which in turn enhanced the appeal of tv air time to the advertisers. this cycle allowed the ioc to charge ever-increasing fees for those rights. for example, cbs paid us$375 million for the american broadcast rights for the 1998 nagano games, while nbc spent us$3.5 billion for the american rights to air every olympic games fro. in 2011, nbc agreed to a $4.38 billion contract with the ioc to broadcast the olympics through the 2020 games, the most expensive television rights deal in olympic history. nbc then agreed to a $7.75 billion contract extension o, to air the olympics through the 2032 games. nbc also acquired the american television rights to the youth olympic games, beginning in 2014, and the paralympic games. more than half of the olympic committee's global sponsors are american companies, and nbc is one of the major sources of revenue for the ioc.
viewership increased exponentially from the 1960s until the end of the 20th century. this was due to the advent of satellites for broadcasting live television worldwide starting in 1964, and the introduction of colour television in 1968. the global audience for the 1968 mexico city games was estimated to be 600 million, whereas the audience numbers at the los angeles games of 1984 had increased to 900 million; this number had swelled to 3.5 billion by the 1992 summer olympics in barcelona. with such high costs charged to broadcast the games, the added pressure of the internet, and increased competition from cable, the television lobby demanded concessions from the ioc to boost ratings. the ioc responded by making a number of changes to the olympic programme; at the summer games, the gymnastics competition was expanded from seven to nine nights, and a champions gala was added to attract greater interest; the events programmes were also expanded for swimming and diving, both popular sports with a broad base of television viewers. due to the substantial fees nbc has paid for rights to the olympics, the ioc has allowed the network to influence the event scheduling to maximise u.s. television ratings when possible. notable examples of maximizing u.s. television viewership include scheduling the finals of the swimming events only during the mornings of the host cities beijing (during the 2008 summer olympics) and tokyo (during the 2020 summer olympics), which coincide with the evening prime time broadcast slots of the united states.
olympic marketing
the sale of the olympic brand has been controversial. the argument is that the games have become indistinguishable from any other commercialised sporting spectacle. another criticism is that the games are funded by host cities and national governments; the ioc incurs none of the cost, yet controls all the rights and profits from the olympic symbols. the ioc also takes a percentage of all sponsorship and broadcast income. host cities continue to compete ardently for the right to host the games, even though there is no certainty that they will earn back their investments. research has shown that trade is around 30 percent higher for countries that have hosted the olympics.
symbols
main article: olympic symbols
the olympic flag
the olympic movement uses symbols to represent the ideals embodied in the olympic charter. the olympic symbol, better known as the olympic rings, consists of five intertwined rings and represents the unity of the five inhabited continents (africa, the americas (is considered one continent), asia, europe, and oceania). the coloured version of the rings—blue, yellow, black, green, and red—over a white field forms the olympic flag. these colours were chosen because every nation had at least one of them on its national flag. the flag was adopted in 1914 but flown for the first time only at the 1920 summer olympics in antwerp, belgium. it has since been hoisted during each celebration of the games.
the olympic motto, citius, altius, fortius, a latin expression meaning "faster, higher, stronger" was proposed by pierre de coubertin in 1894 and has been official since 1924. the motto was coined by coubertin's friend, the dominican priest henri didon op, for a paris youth gathering of 1891.
coubertin's olympic ideals are expressed in the olympic creed:
the most important thing in the olympic games is not to win but to take part, just as the most important thing in life is not the triumph but the struggle. the essential thing is not to have conquered but to have fought well.
months before each games, the olympic flame is lit at the temple of hera in olympia in a ceremony that reflects ancient greek rituals. a female performer, acting as a priestess joined by ten female performers as vestal virgins, ignites a torch by placing it inside a parabolic mirror which focuses the sun's rays; she then lights the torch of the first relay bearer (who also is a greek athlete), thus initiating the olympic torch relay that will carry the flame to the host city's olympic stadium, where it plays an important role in the opening ceremony. though the flame has been an olympic symbol since 1928, the torch relay was only introduced at the 1936 summer games to promote the third reich.
the olympic mascot, an animal or human figure representing the cultural heritage of the host country, was introduced in 1968. it has played an important part of the games' identity promotion since the 1980 summer olympics, when the soviet bear cub misha reached international stardom. the mascot of the summer olympics in london was named wenlock after the town of much wenlock in shropshire. much wenlock still hosts the wenlock olympian games, which were an inspiration to pierre de coubertin for the olympic games.
ceremonies
main article: olympic games ceremony
opening ceremony
opening ceremony of the 2020 summer olympics in tokyo
as mandated by the olympic charter, various elements frame the opening ceremony of the olympic games. this ceremony takes place on a friday and is held prior to the commencement of the sporting events (apart from some group-stage football matches, softball games, and rowing heats). most of the rituals for the opening ceremony were established at the 1920 summer olympics in antwerp. the ceremony typically starts with the entrance of the president of the international olympic committee and a representative of the host country followed by the hoisting of the host country's flag and a performance of its national anthem. the host nation then presents artistic displays of music, singing, dance, and theatre representative of its culture. the artistic presentations have grown in scale and complexity as successive hosts attempt to provide a ceremony that outlasts its predecessor's in terms of memorability. the opening ceremony of the beijing games reportedly cost $100 million, with much of the cost incurred in the artistic segment.
after the artistic portion of the ceremony, the athletes parade into the stadium grouped by nation. greece is traditionally the first nation to enter and leads the parade in order to honour the origins of the olympics. nations then enter the stadium alphabetically according to the host country's chosen language, with the host country's athletes being the last to enter. during the 2004 summer olympics, which was hosted in athens, greece, the greek flag entered the stadium first, while the greek delegation entered last. beginning with the 2020 summer olympics, the succeeding hosts of the respective olympic games (summer or winter) will enter immediately before the current host in descending order. speeches are given by the president of the organizing committee, the ioc president, and the head of state/representative of the host country, formally opening the games. finally, the olympic torch is brought into the stadium and passed on until it reaches the final torch carrier, often a successful olympic athlete from the host nation, who lights the olympic flame in the stadium's cauldron.
closing ceremony
athletes gather in the stadium during the closing ceremony of the 2008 summer olympics in beijing.
the closing ceremony of the olympic games takes place on a sunday and after all sporting events have concluded. flag-bearers from each participating country enter the stadium, followed by the athletes who enter together, without any national distinction. three national flags are hoisted while the corresponding national anthems are played: the flag of the current host country; the flag of greece, to honour the birthplace of the olympic games; and the flag of the country hosting the next summer or winter olympic games. the president of the organising committee and the ioc president make their closing speeches, the games are officially closed, and the olympic flame is extinguished. in what is known as the antwerp ceremony, the current mayor of the city that organised the games transfers a special olympic flag to the president of the ioc, who then passes it on to the current mayor of the city hosting the next olympic games. the next host nation then also briefly introduces itself with artistic displays of dance and theatre representative of its culture.
as is customary, the last medal presentation of the games is held as part of the closing ceremony. typically, the marathon medals are presented at the summer olympics, while the cross-country skiing mass start medals are awarded at the winter olympics.
medal presentation
a medal ceremony at the 2008 summer olympics with (from left to right): the danish flag, the union flag of the uk, and the new zealand flag
a medal ceremony is held after the conclusion of each olympic event. the winner, and the second- and third-place competitors or teams, stand on top of a three-tiered rostrum to be awarded their respective medals by a member of the ioc. after the medals have been received, the national flags of the three medallists are raised while the national anthem of the gold medallist's country is played. volunteering citizens of the host country also act as hosts during the medal ceremonies, assisting the officials who present the medals and acting as flag-bearers. in the summer olympics, each medal ceremony is held at the venue where the event has taken place, but the ceremonies at the winter olympics are usually held in a special "plaza".
sports
main article: olympic sports
the olympic games programme consists of 35 sports, 30 disciplines and 408 events. for example, wrestling is a summer olympic sport, comprising two disciplines: greco-roman and freestyle. it is further broken down into fourteen events for men and four events for women, each representing a different weight class. the summer olympics programme includes 26 sports, while the winter olympics programme features 15 sports. athletics, swimming, fencing, and artistic gymnastics are the only summer sports that have never been absent from the olympic programme. cross-country skiing, figure skating, ice hockey, nordic combined, ski jumping, and speed skating have been featured at every winter olympics programme since its inception in 1924. current olympic sports, like badminton, basketball, and volleyball, first appeared on the programme as demonstration sports, and were later promoted to full olympic sports. some sports that were featured in earlier games were later dropped from the programme.
olympic sports are governed by international sports federations (ifs) recognised by the ioc as the global supervisors of those sports. there are 35 federations represented at the ioc. there are sports recognised by the ioc that are not included in the olympic programme. these sports are not considered olympic sports, but they can be promoted to this status during a programme revision that occurs in the first ioc session following a celebration of the olympic games. during such revisions, sports can be excluded or included in the programme on the basis of a two-thirds majority vote of the members of the ioc. there are recognised sports that have never been on an olympic programme in any capacity, for example, squash.
in october and november 2004, the ioc established an olympic programme commission, which was tasked with reviewing the sports on the olympic programme and all non-olympic recognised sports. the goal was to apply a systematic approach to establishing the olympic programme for each celebration of the games. the commission formulated seven criteria to judge whether a sport should be included on the olympic programme. these criteria are history and tradition of the sport, universality, popularity of the sport, image, athletes' health, development of the international federation that governs the sport, and costs of holding the sport. from this study five recognised sports emerged as candidates for inclusion at the 2012 summer olympics: golf, karate, rugby sevens, roller sports and squash. these sports were reviewed by the ioc executive board and then referred to the general session in singapore in july 2005. of the five sports recommended for inclusion only two were selected as finalists: karate and squash. neither sport attained the required two-thirds vote and consequently they were not promoted to the olympic programme. in october 2009 the ioc voted to instate golf and rugby sevens as olympic sports for th summer olympic games.
the 114th ioc session, in 2002, limited the summer games programme to a maximum of 28 sports, 301 events, and 10,500 athletes. three years later, at the 117th ioc session, the first major programme revision was performed, which resulted in the exclusion of baseball and softball from the official programme of the 2012 london games. since there was no agreement in the promotion of two other sports, the 2012 programme featured just 26 sports. th games will return to the maximum of 28 sports given the addition of rugby and golf.
amateurism and professionalism
further information: amateur sports
professional nhl players were allowed to participate in ice hockey starting in 1998 (1998 gold medal game between russia and the czech republic pictured).
the ethos of the aristocracy as exemplified in the english public school greatly influenced pierre de coubertin. the public schools subscribed to the belief that sport formed an important part of education, an attitude summed up in the saying mens sana in corpore sano, a sound mind in a sound body. in this ethos, a gentleman was one who became an all-rounder, not the best at one specific thing. there was also a prevailing concept of fairness, in which practising or training was considered tantamount to cheating. those who practised a sport professionally were considered to have an unfair advantage over those who practised it merely as a hobby.
the exclusion of professionals caused several controversies throughout the history of the modern olympics. the 1912 olympic pentathlon and decathlon champion jim thorpe was stripped of his medals when it was discovered that he had played semi-professional baseball before the olympics. his medals were posthumously restored by the ioc in 1983 on compassionate grounds. swiss and austrian skiers boycotted the 1936 winter olympics in support of their skiing teachers, who were not allowed to compete because they earned money with their sport and were thus considered professionals.
the advent of the state-sponsored "full-time amateur athlete" of the eastern bloc countries eroded the ideology of the pure amateur, as it put the self-financed amateurs of the western countries at a disadvantage. the soviet union entered teams of athletes who were all nominally students, soldiers, or working in a profession, but all of whom were in reality paid by the state to train on a full-time basis. the situation greatly disadvantaged american and western european athletes, and was a major factor in the decline of american medal hauls in the 1970s and 1980s. as a result, the olympics shifted away from amateurism, as envisioned by pierre de coubertin, to allowing participation of professional athletes, but only in the 1990s, after the collapse of the soviet union and its influence within the international olympic committee.
team canada ice hockey dispute
near the end of the 1960s, the canadian amateur hockey association (caha) felt their amateur players could no longer be competitive against the soviet team's full-time athletes and the other constantly improving european teams. they pushed for the ability to use players from professional leagues but met opposition from the iihf and ioc. at the iihf congress in 1969, the iihf decided to allow canada to use nine non-nhl professional hockey players at the 1970 world championships in montreal and winnipeg, canada. the decision was reversed in january 1970 after brundage said that ice hockey's status as an olympic sport would be in jeopardy if the change was made. in response, canada withdrew from international ice hockey competition and officials stated that they would not return until "open competition" was instituted. günther sabetzki became president of the iihf in 1975 and helped to resolve the dispute with the caha. in 1976, the iihf agreed to allow "open competition" between all players in the world championships. however, nhl players were still not allowed to play in the olympics until 1988, because of the ioc's amateur-only policy.
controversies
main article: olympic games scandals and controversies
boycotts
main article: list of olympic games boycotts
countries that boycotted the 1956 summer olympics (shaded blue)
countries that boycotted the 1964 summer olympics (shaded red)
countries that boycotted the 1976 summer olympics (shaded blue)
countries that boycotted the 1980 summer olympics (shaded blue)
countries that boycotted the 1984 summer olympics (shaded blue)
greece, australia, france, and united kingdom are the only countries to be represented at every olympic games since their inception in 1896. while countries sometimes miss an olympics due to a lack of qualified athletes, some choose to boycott a celebration of the games for various reasons. the olympic council of ireland boycotted the 1936 berlin games, because the ioc insisted its team needed to be restricted to the irish free state rather than representing the entire island of ireland.
there were three boycotts of the 1956 melbourne olympics: the netherlands, spain, and switzerland refused to attend because of the repression of the hungarian uprising by the soviet union, but did send an equestrian delegation to stockholm; cambodia, egypt, iraq, and lebanon boycotted the games because of the suez crisis; and the people's republic of china boycotted the games due to the participation of the republic of china, composed of athletes coming from taiwan.
i a large number of african countries threatened the ioc with a boycott to force them to ban south africa and rhodesia, because of their segregationist rule. new zealand was also one of the african boycott targets, because its national rugby union team had toured apartheid-ruled south africa. the ioc conceded in the first two cases, but refused to ban new zealand on the grounds that rugby was not an olympic sport. fulfilling their threat, twenty african countries were joined by guyana and iraq in a withdrawal from the montreal games, after a few of their athletes had already competed.
the republic of china (taiwan) was excluded from the 1976 games by order of pierre elliott trudeau, the prime minister of canada. trudeau's action was widely condemned as having brought shame on canada for having succumbed to political pressure to keep the chinese delegation from competing under its name. the roc refused a proposed compromise that would have still allowed them to use the roc flag and anthem as long as the name was changed. athletes from taiwan did not participate again until 1984, when they returned under the name of chinese taipei and with a special flag and anthem.
i, the cold war opponents boycotted each other's games. the united states and sixty-five other countries boycotted the moscow olympics in 1980 because of the soviet invasion of afghanistan. this boycott reduced the number of nations participating to 80, the lowest number since 1956. the soviet union and 15 other nations countered by boycotting the los angeles olympics of 1984. although a boycott led by the soviet union depleted the field in certain sports, 140 national olympic committees took part, which was a record at the time. the fact that romania, a warsaw pact country, opted to compete despite soviet demands led to a warm reception of the romanian team by the united states. when the romanian athletes entered during the opening ceremonies, they received a standing ovation from the spectators, which comprised mostly u.s. citizens. the boycotting nations of the eastern bloc staged their own alternate event, the friendship games, in july and august.
there had been growing calls for boycotts of chinese goods and the 2008 olympics in beijing in protest of china's human rights record, and in response to tibetan disturbances. ultimately, no nation supported a boycott. in august 2008, the government of georgia called for a boycott of the 2014 winter olympics, set to be held in sochi, russia, in response to russia's participation in the 2008 south ossetia war. continuing human rights violations in china have led to "diplomatic boycotts", where athletes still compete at the games but diplomats do not attend, of the 2022 winter olympics in beijing by several countries, most notably the united states.
politics
jesse owens on the podium after winning the long jump at the 1936 summer olympics
the olympic games have been used as a platform to promote political ideologies almost from its inception. nazi germany wished to portray the national socialist party as benevolent and peace-loving when they hosted the 1936 games, though they used the games to display aryan superiority. germany was the most successful nation at the games, which did much to support their allegations of aryan supremacy, but notable victories by african american jesse owens, who won four gold medals, and hungarian jew ibolya csák, blunted the message. the soviet union did not participate until the 1952 summer olympics in helsinki. instead, starting in 1928, the soviets organised an international sports event called spartakiads. during the interwar period of the 1920s and 1930s, communist and socialist organisations in several countries, including the united states, attempted to counter what they called the "bourgeois" olympics with the workers olympics. it was not until the 1956 summer games that the soviets emerged as a sporting superpower and, in doing so, took full advantage of the publicity that came with winning at the olympics. soviet union's success might be attributed to a heavy state's investment in sports to fulfill its political agenda on an international stage.
individual athletes have also used the olympic stage to promote their own political agenda. at the 1968 summer olympics in mexico city, two american track and field athletes, tommie smith and john carlos, who finished first and third in the 200 metres, performed the black power salute on the victory stand. the second-place finisher, peter norman of australia, wore an olympic project for human rights badge in support of smith and carlos. in response to the protest, ioc president avery brundage ordered smith and carlos suspended from the us team and banned from the olympic village. when the us olympic committee refused, brundage threatened to ban the entire us track team. this threat led to the expulsion of the two athletes from the games. in another notable incident in the gymnastics competition, while standing on the medal podium after the balance beam event final, in which natalia kuchinskaya of the soviet union had controversially taken the gold, czechoslovakian gymnast věra čáslavská quietly turned her head down and away during the playing of the soviet national anthem. the action was čáslavská's silent protest against the recent soviet invasion of czechoslovakia. her protest was repeated when she accepted her medal for her floor exercise routine when the judges changed the preliminary scores of the soviet larisa petrik to allow her to tie with čáslavská for the gold. while čáslavská's countrymen supported her actions and her outspoken opposition to communism (she had publicly signed and supported ludvik vaculik's "two thousand words" manifesto), the new regime responded by banning her from both sporting events and international travel for many years and made her an outcast from society until the fall of communism.
currently, the government of iran has taken steps to avoid any competition between its athletes and those from israel. an iranian judoka, arash miresmaeili, did not compete in a match against an israeli during the 2004 summer olympics. although he was officially disqualified for being overweight, miresmaeli was awarded us$125,000 in prize money by the iranian government, an amount paid to all iranian gold medal winners. he was officially cleared of intentionally avoiding the bout, but his receipt of the prize money raised suspicion.
in 2022, in the wake of the russian invasion of ukraine, the ioc executive board "recommends no participation of russian and belarusian athletes and officials, urges international sports federations and organizers of sports events worldwide to do everything in their power to ensure that no athlete or sports official from russia or belarus be allowed to take part under the name of russia or belarus."
use of performance-enhancing drugs
main article: use of performance-enhancing drugs in the olympic games
thomas hicks running the marathon at the 1904 olympics
in the early 20th century, many olympic athletes began using drugs to improve their athletic abilities. for example, in 1904, thomas hicks, a gold medallist in the marathon, was given strychnine by his coach (at the time, taking different substances was allowed, as there was no data regarding the effect of these substances on a body of an athlete). the only olympic death linked to performance enhancing occurred at the 1960 rome games. a danish cyclist, knud enemark jensen, fell from his bicycle and later died. a coroner's inquiry found that he was under the influence of amphetamines. by the mid-1960s, sports federations started to ban the use of performance-enhancing drugs; in 1967 the ioc followed suit.
according to british journalist andrew jennings, a kgb colonel stated that the agency's officers had posed as anti-doping authorities from the international olympic committee to undermine doping tests and that soviet athletes were "rescued with [these] tremendous efforts". on the topic of the 1980 summer olympics, a 1989 australian study said "there is hardly a medal winner at the moscow games, certainly not a gold medal winner, who is not on one sort of drug or another: usually several kinds. the moscow games might as well have been called the chemists' games."
documents obtained in 2016 revealed the soviet union's plans for a statewide doping system in track and field in preparation for the 1984 summer olympics in los angeles. dated prior to the country's decision to boycott the games, the document detailed the existing steroids operations of the program, along with suggestions for further enhancements. the communication, directed to the soviet union's head of track and field, was prepared by sergei portugalov of the institute for physical culture. portugalov was also one of the main figures involved in the implementation of the russian doping programme prior to the 2016 summer olympics.
the first olympic athlete to test positive for the use of performance-enhancing drugs was hans-gunnar liljenwall, a swedish pentathlete at the 1968 summer olympics, who lost his bronze medal for alcohol use. one of the most publicised doping-related disqualifications occurred after the 1988 summer olympics where canadian sprinter ben johnson (who won the 100-metre dash) tested positive for stanozolol.
in 1999, the ioc formed the world anti-doping agency (wada) in an effort to systematise the research and detection of performance-enhancing drugs. there was a sharp increase in positive drug tests at the 2000 summer olympics and 2002 winter olympics due to improved testing conditions. several medallists in weightlifting and cross-country skiing from post-soviet states were disqualified because of doping offences. the ioc-established drug testing regimen (now known as the olympic standard) has set the worldwide benchmark that other sporting federations attempt to emulate. during the beijing games, 3,667 athletes were tested by the ioc under the auspices of the world anti-doping agency. both urine and blood tests were used to detect banned substances. in london over 6,000 olympic and paralympic athletes were tested. prior to the games 107 athletes tested positive for banned substances and were not allowed to compete.
russian doping scandal
this article or section appears to be slanted towards recent events. please try to keep recent events in historical perspective and add more content related to non-recent events. (december 2022) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
further information: doping in russia, mclaren report, russia at the 2012 summer olympics § russian doping scandal, russia at the 2014 winter olympics, russia at the 2016 summer olympics, olympic athletes from russia at the 2018 winter olympics, and oswald commission
doping in russian sports has a systemic nature. russia has had 44 olympic medals stripped for doping violations – the most of any country, more than three times the number of the runner-up, and more than a quarter of the global total. fro, more than a thousand russian competitors in various sports, including summer, winter, and paralympic sports, benefited from a cover-up. russia was partially banned from the 2016 summer olympics and was banned from the 2018 winter olympics (while being allowed to participate as the olympic athletes from russia) due to the state-sponsored doping programme.
in december 2019, russia was banned for four years from all major sporting events for systematic doping and lying to wada. the ban was issued by wada o, and the russian anti-doping agency rusada had 21 days to make an appeal to the court of arbitration for sport (cas). the ban meant that russian athletes would only be allowed to compete under the olympic flag after passing anti-doping tests. russia appealed the decision to the cas. the cas, on review of russia's appeal of its case from wada, ruled on december 17, 2020, to reduce the penalty that wada had placed. instead of banning russia from sporting events, the ruling allowed russia to participate at the olympics and other international events, but for a period of two years, the team cannot use the russian name, flag, or anthem and must present themselves as "neutral athlete" or "neutral team". the ruling does allow for team uniforms to display "russia" on the uniform as well as the use of the russian flag colors within the uniform's design, although the name should be up to equal predominance as the "neutral athlete/team" designation.
in february 2022, during the beijing olympics, the international news media reported on 9 february that the issue of doping was again raised over a positive test for trimetazidine by the roc's kamila valieva, which was officially confirmed on 11 february. valieva's sample in question was taken by the russian anti-doping agency (rusada) at the 2022 russian figure skating championships on 25 december, but the sample was not analyzed at the world anti-doping agency (wada) laboratory where it was sent for testing until 8 february, one day after the team event concluded. the court of arbitration for sport (cas) is expected to hear the case on 13 february with a decision scheduled for announcement on 14 february ahead of her scheduled appearance in the women's singles event beginning 15 february. due to valieva being a minor at the time, as well as being classified as a "protected person" under wada guidelines, rusada and the ioc announced on 12 february that they would broaden the scope of their respective investigations to include members of her entourage (e.g. coaches, team doctors, etc.). by the end of the beijing olympics, a total five athletes were reported for doping violations. a decision by rusada was issued in mid-october, which was endorsed by wada, stating that the details of the valieva hearing and its scheduled dates would be placed under international guidelines for the protection of minors (valieva was 15 years old when the positive test results were disclosed) and not to be disclosed publicly. although russia as a country is currently banned from participating in international skating events due to the 2022 russian invasion of ukraine, valieva has continued to compete within russian borders without being hindered by rusada as recently as the russian grand prix held in october 2022. in mid-november, wada requested that cas take up the review of the valieva case with an eye towards a 4-year suspension of valieva, which would exclude her from competition at the next winter olympics, and to rescind her first place performance at the previous beijing olympics because, "the russian anti-doping agency (rusada) did not meet a wada-imposed nov. 4 deadline to deliver a verdict on valiyeva’s case."
sex discrimination
main article: participation of women in the olympics
charlotte cooper of the united kingdom was the first female olympic champion, in the 1900 games.
women were first allowed to compete at the 1900 summer olympics in paris, but at the 1992 summer olympics 35 countries were still only fielding all-male delegations. this number dropped rapidly over the following years. in 2000, bahrain sent two women competitors for the first time: fatema hameed gerashi and mariam mohamed hadi al hilli. in 2004, robina muqimyar and fariba rezayee became the first women to compete for afghanistan at the olympics. in 2008, the united arab emirates sent female athletes (maitha al maktoum competed in taekwondo, and latifa al maktoum in equestrian) to the olympic games for the first time. both athletes were from dubai's ruling family.
by 2010, only three countries had never sent female athletes to the games: brunei, saudi arabia, and qatar. brunei had taken part in only three celebrations of the games, sending a single athlete on each occasion, but saudi arabia and qatar had been competing regularly with all-male teams. in 2010, the international olympic committee announced it would "press" these countries to enable and facilitate the participation of women for the 2012 summer olympics in london. anita defrantz, chair of the ioc's women and sports commission, suggested that countries be barred if they prevented women from competing. shortly thereafter, the qatar olympic committee announced that it "hoped to send up to four female athletes in shooting and fencing" to the 2012 summer games.
in 2008, ali al-ahmed, director of the institute for gulf affairs, likewise called for saudi arabia to be barred from the games, describing its ban on women athletes as a violation of the international olympic committee charter. he noted: "for the last 15 years, many international nongovernmental organisations worldwide have been trying to lobby the ioc for better enforcement of its own laws banning gender discrimination. while their efforts did result in increasing numbers of women olympians, the ioc has been reluctant to take a strong position and threaten the discriminating countries with suspension or expulsion." in july 2010, the independent reported: "pressure is growing on the international olympic committee to kick out saudi arabia, who are likely to be the only major nation not to include women in their olympic team for 2012. should saudi arabia. send a male-only team to london, we understand they will face protests from equal rights and women's groups which threaten to disrupt the games".
at the 2012 summer olympics, every participating nation included female athletes for the first time in olympic history. saudi arabia included two female athletes in its delegation; qatar, four; and brunei, one (maziah mahusin, in the 400 m hurdles). qatar made one of its first female olympians, bahiya al-hamad (shooting), its flagbearer at the 2012 games, and runner maryam yusuf jamal of bahrain became the first gulf female athlete to win a medal when she won a bronze for her showing in the 1500 m race.
the only sport on the olympic programme that features men and women competing together is the equestrian disciplines. there is no "women's eventing", or "men's dressage". as of 2008, there were still more medal events for men than women. with the addition of women's boxing to the programme in the 2012 summer olympics, however, women athletes were able to compete in all the sports open to men. in the winter olympics, women are still unable to compete in the nordic combined. there are currently two olympic events in which male athletes may not compete: synchronised swimming and rhythmic gymnastics.
war and terrorism
the world wars caused three olympiads to pass without a celebration of the games: the 1916 games were cancelled because of world war i, and the summer and winter games o were cancelled because of world war ii. the russo-georgian war between georgia and russia erupted on the opening day of the 2008 summer olympics in beijing. both president bush and prime minister putin were attending the olympics at that time and spoke together about the conflict at a luncheon hosted by the chinese president hu jintao.
terrorism most directly affected the olympic games in 1972. when the summer games were held in munich, germany, eleven members of the israeli olympic team were taken hostage by the palestinian terrorist group black september in what is now known as the munich massacre. the terrorists killed two of the athletes soon after taking them hostage and killed the other nine during a failed liberation attempt. a german police officer and five of the terrorists also died. following the selection of barcelona, spain, to host the 1992 summer olympics, the separatist eta terrorist organisation launched attacks in the region, including the 1991 bombing in the catalonian city of vic that killed ten people.
terrorism affected two olympic games held in the united states. during the 1996 summer olympics in atlanta, a bomb was detonated at the centennial olympic park, killing two people and injuring 111 others. the bomb was set by eric rudolph, an american domestic terrorist, who is serving a life sentence for the bombing. the 2002 winter olympics in salt lake city took place just five months after the september 11 attacks, which meant a higher level of security than ever before provided for an olympic games. the opening ceremonies of the games featured symbols relating to 9/11, including the flag that flew at ground zero and honour guards of nypd and fdny members.
citizenship
ioc rules for citizenship
the olympic charter requires that an athlete be a national of the country for which they compete. dual nationals may compete for either country, as long as three years have passed since the competitor competed for the former country. however, if the nocs and if involved agree, then the ioc executive board may reduce or cancel this period. this waiting period exists only for athletes who previously competed for one nation and want to compete for another. if an athlete gains a new or second nationality, then they do not need to wait any designated amount of time before participating for the new or second nation. the ioc is only concerned with issues of citizenship and nationality after individual nations have granted citizenship to athletes.
reasons for changing citizenship
occasionally, an athlete will become a citizen of a different country to enable them to compete in the olympics. this is often because they are attracted to sponsorship deals or training facilities in the other country, or the athlete might be unable to qualify from within their country of birth. in preparation for the 2014 winter olympics in sochi, the russian olympic committee naturalised a south korean-born short-track speed-skater, ahn hyun-soo, and an american-born snowboarder, vic wild. the two athletes won five gold medals and one bronze medal between them at the 2014 games.
champions and medallists
paavo nurmi (1897–1973), a finnish middle-distance and long-distance runner, nicknamed the "flying finn" or the "phantom finn", set 22 official world records at distances between 1500 m and 20 km, winning nine golds and three silvers in his 12 events at the olympic games.
further information: lists of olympic medalists and list of multiple olympic gold medalists
medals are awarded to the athletes or teams who place first, second, and third in each event. the winners receive gold medals, which were solid gold until 1912, later made of gilded silver, and now gold-plated silver. every gold medal must contain at least six grams of pure gold. the runners-up are awarded silver medals and the third-place athletes receive bronze medals. in events contested by a single-elimination tournament (most notably boxing), third place might not be determined and the losers of both semi-finals each receive a bronze medal.
at the 1896 olympics, only the winner and runner-up of each event received medals—silver for first and bronze for second, with no gold medals awarded. the current three-medal format was introduced at the 1904 olympics. from 1948 onward, athletes placing fourth, fifth, and sixth have received certificates, which came to be known officially as olympic diplomas; from 1984, these have also been awarded to the seventh- and eighth-place finishers. at the 2004 summer olympics in athens, the gold, silver, and bronze medal winners were also presented with olive wreaths. the ioc does not keep statistics of medals won on a national level (except for team sports), but the nocs and the media record medal statistics and use them as a measure of each nation's success.
nations
participants
main articles: list of participating nations at the summer olympic games and list of participating nations at the winter olympic games
as of the 2020 games in tokyo, all of the current 206 nocs and 19 obsolete nocs have participated in at least one edition of the summer olympics. competitors from five nations—australia, france,[d] great britain,[e] greece, and switzerland[f]—have competed in all 28 summer olympics. athletes competing under the olympic flag, mixed teams and the refugee team have competed at six summer games.[citation needed]
a total of 119 nocs (110 of the current 206 nocs and nine obsolete nocs) have participated in at least one edition of the winter olympics. competitors from 14 nations—austria, canada, czech republic,[g] finland, france, great britain, hungary, italy, norway, poland, slovakia,[g] sweden, switzerland, and the united states—have participated in all 23 winter games to date.[citation needed]
host nations and cities
main article: list of olympic games host cities: list of olympic medals by host nation
map of summer olympics locations. countries that have hosted one summer olympics are shaded green, while countries that have hosted two or more are shaded blue.
map of winter olympics locations. countries that have hosted one winter olympics are shaded green, while countries that have hosted two or more are shaded blue.
the host city for an olympic games had historically been chosen seven to eight years ahead of their celebration. beginning with th olympics selection process in 2017, the ioc has proceeded to announce the winning bid with a longer lead-in time in order to provide time for the winning cities/regions to prepare. the process of selection is carried out in two phases that span a two-year period. the prospective host city applies to its country's national olympic committee; if more than one city from the same country submits a proposal to its noc, the national committee typically holds an internal selection, since only one city per noc can be presented to the international olympic committee for consideration. once the deadline for submission of proposals by the nocs is reached, the first phase (application) begins with the applicant cities asked to complete a questionnaire regarding several key criteria related to the organisation of the olympic games. in this form, the applicants must give assurances that they will comply with the olympic charter and with any other regulations established by the ioc executive committee. the evaluation of the filled questionnaires by a specialised group provides the ioc with an overview of each applicant's project and their potential to host the games. on the basis of this technical evaluation, the ioc executive board selects the applicants that will proceed to the candidature stage.
once the candidate cities are selected, they must submit to the ioc a bigger and more detailed presentation of their project as part of a candidature file. each city is thoroughly analysed by an evaluation commission. this commission will also visit the candidate cities, interviewing local officials and inspecting prospective venue sites, and submit a report on its findings one month prior to the ioc's final decision. during the interview process the candidate city must also guarantee that it will be able to fund the games. after the work of the evaluation commission, a list of candidates is presented to the general session of the ioc, which must assemble in a country that does not have a candidate city in the running. the ioc members gathered in the session have the final vote on the host city. once elected, the host city bid committee (together with the noc of the respective country) signs a host city contract with the ioc, officially becoming an olympic host nation and host city.
by 2032, the olympic games will have been hosted by 47 cities in 23 countries. as of 2021, since the 1988 summer olympics in seoul, south korea, the olympics have been held in asia or oceania four times, a sharp increase compared to the previous 92 years of modern olympic history. the 2016 games in rio de janeiro were the first olympics for a south american country. no bids from countries in africa have succeeded.
main menu
wikipediathe free encyclopedia
search wikipedia
create account
log in
personal tools
contents hide
(top)
list of nocs with medals (sortable & unranked)
list of nocs without medals (sortable & unranked)
list of defunct historical nocs and special delegations with medals (sortable & unranked)
toggle list of defunct historical nocs and special delegations with medals (sortable & unranked) subsection
top ten medal rankings (combined nocs)
toggle top ten medal rankings (combined nocs) subsection
complete ranked medals (excluding precursors)
toggle complete ranked medals (excluding precursors) subsection
medal leaders by year
toggle medal leaders by year subsection
variations
toggle variations subsection
notes
toggle notes subsection
references
external links
all-time olympic games medal table
edit
this article is about olympic medals by country. for olympic medals by athlete, see lists of olympic medalists and list of multiple olympic medalists.
the all-time medal table for all olympic games fro, including summer olympic games, winter olympic games, and a combined total of both, is tabulated below. these olympic medal counts do not include the 1906 intercalated games which are no longer recognized by the international olympic committee (ioc) as official games. the ioc itself does not publish all-time tables, and publishes unofficial tables only per single games. this table was thus compiled by adding up single entries from the ioc database.
the results are attributed to the ioc country code as currently displayed by the ioc database. usually, a single code corresponds to a single national olympic committee (noc). when different codes are displayed for different years, medal counts are combined in the case of a simple change of ioc code (such as from hol to ned for the netherlands) or simple change of country name (such as from ceylon to sri lanka). as the medals are attributed to each noc, not all totals include medals won by athletes from that country for another noc, such as before independence of that country. names in italic are national entities that no longer exist. the totals of nocs are not combined with those of their predecessors and successors.
world map showing nations that have won summer olympic medals.
world map showing nations that have won winter olympic medals.
the table is pre-sorted by the name of each olympic committee, but can be displayed as sorted by any other column, such as the total number of gold medals or total number of overall medals. to sort by gold, silver, and then bronze, sort first by the bronze column, then the silver, and then the gold. the table does not count revoked medals (e.g., due to doping).
a total of 156 current and historical nocs have earned at least one medal. medal totals in this table are current through the 2022 winter olympics in beijing, people's republic of china, and all changes in medal standings due to doping cases and medal redistributions up t are taken into account.
special delegation, not an actual nation
team summer olympic games winter olympic games combined total
team (ioc code)
no.
1st place, gold medalist(s)
2nd place, silver medalist(s)
3rd place, bronze medalist(s)
total
the sum total of gold, silver, and bronze medals are not equal for the following reasons:
some sports (such as boxing, judo, taekwondo, and wrestling) award or have previously awarded two bronze medals per competition.
team sports medals, such as in football or basketball count as one, even if there are multiple players on each team, who get a medal.
some tied performances have resulted in multiple medals of the same colour being awarded for an event. if this tie is for gold or silver, there will be a consequent absence of a silver or bronze medal for that event.
some medals that have been revoked have not been re-awarded.
some early events, such as cricket at the 1900 summer olympics, had only two entrants.
retroactively awarding gold, silver, and bronze medals for th games results in some anomalies, such as the 100 metre freestyle swimming event in 1896 where no surviving records distinguish the places of those who finished between 3rd and 10th position.
after the 2022 winter olympics in beijing, 68 of the current 206 national olympic committees have yet to win an olympic medal. seven historic national olympic committees and the refugee olympic team are also included in this list.
tejbir bura was the first and only nepalese person to receive an olympic gold medal. during the 1924 winter olympic closing ceremony, the ioc awarded a gold medal in alpinism for the 1922 british mount everest expedition, which recognized 21 mountaineers, including the first athletes to be awarded medals posthumously, seven indian sherpas who were killed in an avalanche on the third and last attempt to summit.
defunct historical nocs with medals
a total of 10 defunct historical nocs have earned at least one medal.
totals 24 710 657 624 1991 19 138 125 128 391 43 848 782 752 2382
special delegations with medals
a total of 8 special delegations have earned at least one medal. medal totals in this table are current through the 2022 winter olympics in beijing, people's republic of china, and all changes in medal standings due to doping cases and medal redistributions up to 20 february are taken into account.
roc (roc) [roc] 1 20 28 23 71 1 6 12 14 34 2 26 40 37 105
totals 10 80 77 68 225 3 17 24 31 74 13 97 101 99 299
the following is the overall medal tally (top ten nations) with the records of current nocs combined with those of their precursors (sorted by gold, then silver, then bronze), through 2022.
summer olympics (including precursors)
current nocs combined with records of precursor nocs:
no. nation gold silver bronze total
incl. russian empire (ru1),
soviet union (urs), unified team (eun),
russian olympic committee (roc)
610 514 503 1627
incl. united team of germany (eua),
west germany (frg), east germany (gdr)
438 457 491 1386
summer olympics (excluding precursors)
separate current and precursor nocs (records not combined):
winter olympics (including precursors)
162 155 118 435
incl. soviet union (urs), unified team (eun),
olympics athletes from russia (oar),
142 120 125 387
winter olympics (excluding precursors)
total, all olympics (including precursors)
752 632 628 2014
600 612 609 1821
total, all olympics (excluding precursors)
summer olympics (1896–2020)
rank noc gold silver bronze total
uruguay (uru) 2 2 6 10
ivory coast (civ) 1 1 2 4
syria (syr) 1 1 2 4
tajikistan (tjk) 1 1 2 4
jordan (jor) 1 1 1 3
independent olympic athletes (ioa)* 1 0 1 2
mozambique (moz) 1 0 1 2
suriname (sur) 1 0 1 2
united arab emirates (uae) 1 0 1 2
lebanon (lib) 0 2 2 4
saudi arabia (ksa) 0 2 2 4
tanzania (tan) 0 2 0 2
san marino (smr) 0 1 2 3
haiti (hai) 0 1 1 2
niger (nig) 0 1 1 2
north macedonia (mkd) 0 1 1 2
zambia (zam) 0 1 1 2
gabon (gab) 0 1 0 1
guatemala (gua) 0 1 0 1
montenegro (mne) 0 1 0 1
netherlands antilles (aho)* 0 1 0 1
paraguay (par) 0 1 0 1
samoa (sam) 0 1 0 1
senegal (sen) 0 1 0 1
sudan (sud) 0 1 0 1
tonga (tga) 0 1 0 1
turkmenistan (tkm) 0 1 0 1
virgin islands (isv) 0 1 0 1
british west indies (bwi)* 0 0 2 2
burkina faso (bur) 0 0 1 1
djibouti (dji) 0 0 1 1
eritrea (eri) 0 0 1 1
guyana (guy) 0 0 1 1
iraq (irq) 0 0 1 1
mauritius (mri) 0 0 1 1
togo (tog) 0 0 1 1
totals (154 entries) 5461 5427 5893 16781
winter olympics (1924–2022)
liechtenstein (lie) 2 2 6 10
totals (47 entries) 1171 1169 1159 3499
combined total (1896–2022)
puerto rico (pur) 2 2 6 10
totals (156 entries) 6633 6594 7053 20280
summer
olympic rings without rims.svg summer olympics medal table leaders by year
number of occurrences
rank country number of games
great britain
germany
china
unified team
winter
olympic rings without rims.svg winter olympics medal table leaders by year
sweden
east germany
canada
special case of germany
if results for east and west germany are combined, german athletes also won the most gold medals in the 1976 summer olympics and the 1988 winter olympics.
early olympics
for the 1900 summer olympics several countries are credited with appearances that are not considered official by the ioc. only one of these cases concerns a medal. a gold medal that is officially added to france's total is given to luxembourg.
other differences from the official table are based on disagreements about which events were olympic. this affects several of the events in th olympics. in addition, some sources include the 1906 intercalated games when compiling their medal tables.
alpinism and aeronautics
fro, the ioc on several occasions awarded gold medals for feats of alpinism and aeronautics that occurred in the preceding four-year olympiad. in 1924, gold medals were awarded to 25 mountaineers from six nations for expeditions in the himalayas and the matterhorn. in 1936, a gold medal was awarded to hermann schreiber of switzerland for crossing the alps in a glider in 1935, the first time that had been done. some sources include these ioc awards of gold medals in the overall count.
australasia
australasia was a combined team of athletes from australia and the dominion of new zealand that competed together at th summer olympics. when the olympic games resumed in 1920 after world war i, the two nations sent separate teams to the games, and have done so ever since.
date team
1900–
1908–
1920– australia (aus) new zealand (nzl)
medal counts:
status after the 2022 winter olympics
summer games winter games combined total
australasia (anz) 2 3 4 5 12 0 0 0 0 0 2 3 4 5 12
australia (aus) 27 164 173 210 547 20 6 7 6 19 47 170 180 216 566
new zealand (nzl) 24 53 33 51 137 17 2 2 2 6 41 55 35 53 143
total 29 220 210 266 696 20 8 9 8 25 49 228 219 274 721
british west indies
the west indies federation, also known as the west indies, the federation of the west indies or the west indian federation, was a short-lived political union that existed fro t. various islands in the caribbean that were part of the british empire, including trinidad and tobago, barbados, jamaica, and those on the leeward and windward islands, came together to form the federation.the expressed intention of the federation was to create a political unit that would become independent from britain as a single state before that could happen, the federation collapsed due to internal political conflicts over how it would be governed or function viably.
athletes from the west indies federation competed under the name antilles (ant), renamed to british west indies (bwi) by the ioc, at the 1960 summer olympics in rome, italy. thirteen competitors—two from barbados, four from trinidad, and seven from jamaica—all men, took part in thirteen events in five sports. the short-lived nation only participated at these single games, as jamaica and trinidad and tobago competed independently again in 1964, and barbados started competing at the 1968 games.
1948–
1968– barbados (bar)
british west indies (bwi) 1 0 0 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 2 2
jamaica (jam) 18 26 36 25 87 9 0 0 0 0 27 26 36 25 87
trinidad and tobago (tto) 18 3 5 11 19 4 0 0 0 0 22 3 5 11 19
barbados (bar) 13 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 13 0 0 1 1
total 18 29 41 39 109 9 0 0 0 0 27 29 41 39 109
czechoslovakia
czechoslovakia first participated at the olympic games in 1920, after having competed as bohemia fro. the nation sent athletes to compete in every summer olympic games since then, except for the 1984 games when they were part of the soviet-led boycott of the 1984 summer olympics.czechoslovakia has participated in every winter olympic games since the inaugural games of 1924.
after the dissolution of czechoslovakia in 1993, the czech republic and slovakia sent independent teams to the olympics starting in 1994.
1900–1912 as bohemia (boh)
1920–
1996– czech republic (cze) slovakia (svk)
status after the 2022 olympics
bohemia (boh) 3 0 1 3 4 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 1 3 4
czechoslovakia (tch) 16 49 49 45 143 16 2 8 15 25 32 51 57 60 168
czech republic (cze) 7 19 21 27 67 8 10 11 12 33 15 29 32 39 100
slovakia (svk) 7 10 14 8 32 8 4 4 2 10 15 14 18 10 42
total 26 78 85 83 246 24 16 23 29 68 50 94 108 112 314
germany has competed under five different designations, including as two separate teams at several games. sources vary in how they present the medals won by these teams. the table below shows sourced combinations of these teams, when applied to the updated medal totals from the main table. a part of germany, saar, competed independently in the summer olympic games in 1952, but failed to win any medals. due to most lists only listing medal counts, it's possible but not certain saar was included as part of germany in their calculations. germany was denied participation on three occasions (1920, 1924, and 1948).
1896–1912 german empire germany (ger)
1920–1924 denied participation
1928–1936 weimar republic nazi germany germany (ger)
1948 denied participation
1956–
1968–
1992– germany (ger)
germany (ger) 17 201 207 247 655 13 104 98 65 267 30 305 305 312 922
saar (saa) 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0
united team of germany (eua) 3 28 54 36 118 3 8 6 5 19 6 36 60 41 137
east germany (gdr) 5 153 129 127 409 6 39 36 35 110 11 192 165 162 519
west germany (frg) 5 56 67 81 204 6 11 15 13 39 11 67 82 94 243
total 26 438 457 491 1386 22 162 155 118 435 48 600 612 609 1821
kuwait
at the 2016 summer olympics nine athletes from kuwait competed as independent olympic athletes (ioa), as the kuwait olympic committee had been suspended by the international olympic committee (ioc) for the second time in five years due to governmental interference. although not allowed to compete as a sovereign state at the 2016 summer olympics, the nation's participants were able to compete as independent olympic athletes under the olympic flag. at those games, kuwaiti shooters fehaid al-deehani and abdullah al-rashidi won a gold medal and bronze medal respectively as independent athletes.
1968–
2020– kuwait (kuw)
independent olympic athletes (ioa) (2016) 1 1 0 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 2
total 14 1 0 4 5 0 0 0 0 0 14 1 0 4 5
netherlands antilles
the netherlands antilles participated at the olympic games fro as a constituent country of the kingdom of the netherlands. the national olympic committee for the netherlands antilles was created in 1931 and recognized by the international olympic committee fro upon the dissolution of the netherlands antilles.
aruba left the netherlands antilles in 1986 to become a constituent country within the kingdom of the netherlands. betwee, aruban athletes competed as part of the netherlands antilles. since the olympic games in 1988, athletes from aruba have competed separately under their own olympic banner and have participated in each summer olympic games since then.
after the dissolution of the netherlands antilles in 2010, bonaire, sint eustatius and saba became part of the netherlands as special municipalities of the netherlands. curaçao and sint maarten became separate constituent countries of the kingdom of the netherlands. at the 2012 olympics, participants from the five islands competed as independent athletes under the olympic flag. however, athletes from the former netherlands antilles who qualified for the 2012 olympics were allowed to participate independently under the olympic flag, in addition to the possibility of competing for the netherlands (as for example churandy martina did) or aruba (because they have dutch nationality). ultimately, three athletes from the netherlands antilles participated as independent olympic athletes.
1900–
1952–
1988–
2012 as part of netherlands /
independent olympic athletes (ioa) (2012)
2014– netherlands (ned)
netherlands (ned) 27 95 105 122 322 22 53 49 45 147 49 148 154 167 469
netherlands antilles (aho) 13 0 1 0 1 2 0 0 0 0 15 0 1 0 1
aruba (aru) 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0
independent olympic athletes (ioa) (2012) 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0
total 27 95 106 122 323 22 53 49 45 147 49 148 155 167 470
republic of china
the republic of china (roc) participated in its first summer olympics in 1932 under the name of china. after the chinese civil war, the roc retreated to the island of taiwan in 1949, and only taiwan-based athletes have competed on its behalf since then. in 1971, the roc was expelled from the united nations, but was permitted to compete under its official name, flag, and anthem in the 1972 winter, 1972 summer, and 1976 winter olympics. it was denied official representation in the 1976 summer olympics and boycotted it as a result. the 1979 nagoya resolution allowed the roc to compete under the deliberately-ambiguous name "chinese taipei"; it protested against this decision and boycotted the 1980 summer olympics as well, but has competed under this name since the 1984 winter olympics.
the republic of china took part in the opening ceremony of the 1924 summer olympics, but its four athletes, all of whom were tennis players, withdrew from competition.
1924–
1956– chinese taipei (tpe)
republic of china (roc) 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0
china (chn) 11 262 199 173 634 12 22 32 23 77 23 284 231 196 711
chinese taipei (tpe) 15 7 11 18 36 13 0 0 0 0 28 7 11 18 36
total 19 269 210 191 670 14 22 32 23 77 33 291 242 214 747
russia and the soviet union
the russian federation, the russian empire, the olympic athletes from russia and the russian olympic committee (roc) are sometimes combined outside of ioc sources. the soviet union is often combined with the post-union team that competed in 1992. some sources combine the soviet union and russia, despite the fact that many republics which subsequently gained or re-gained independence (armenia, azerbaijan, belarus, estonia, georgia, kazakhstan, kyrgyzstan, latvia, lithuania, moldova, tajikistan, turkmenistan, ukraine and uzbekistan) contributed to the medal tally of the ussr, and there are sources that combine all medals of ru1, urs, eun, oar, roc and rus. o, the united nations recognized, without objection, russia as legal successor of the rights and obligations of the former soviet union, but this has no significance in medal tallies.
1900–
1924–
1952–
1996–
2020–
russia combined with precursors
russia (rus) 6 149 125 152 426 6 47 39 35 121 12 196 164 187 547
russian empire (ru1) 3 1 4 3 8 0 0 0 0 0 3 1 4 3 8
soviet union (urs) 9 395 319 296 1010 9 78 57 59 194 18 473 376 355 1204
unified team (eun) 1 45 38 29 112 1 9 6 8 23 2 54 44 37 135
olympic athletes from russia (oar) 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 6 9 17 1 2 6 9 17
russian olympic committee (roc) 1 20 28 23 71 1 6 12 14 32 2 26 40 37 103
total 20 610 514 503 1627 18 142 120 125 387 38 752 634 628 2014
post-soviet states (except russia)
total 13 113 162 265 540 12 18 17 21 56 25 131 179 286 596
yugoslavia
teams from yugoslavia first participated at the olympic games in 1920. yugoslavia has been the designation for olympic teams from three distinct national entities:
kingdom of yugoslavia (officially called the kingdom of serbs, croats and slovenes until 1929) from 1920–1936
socialist federal republic of yugoslavia from 1948 to the 1992 winter olympics
federal republic of yugoslavia, formed as a joint state by only montenegro and serbia after the breakup of yugoslavia, fro
the united nations affirmed that the socialist federal republic of yugoslavia had ceased to exist, and the federal republic of yugoslavia (fry) was a new state. all former republics were entitled to state succession, while none of them continued sfr yugoslavia's international legal personality. as a result of the u.n. resolution, individual fry athletes were allowed to compete as independent olympic participants at the 1992 summer olympics, and fry was not allowed to compete at the 1994 winter olympics.
the federal republic of yugoslavia, consisting of the republic of serbia and the republic of montenegro, participated at the games since 1996. at th games, the nation was designated with the same code, yugoslavia (yug), as the defunct sfry. it was rechartered as the state union of serbia and montenegro in 2003 with there being no territorial changes. the serbia and montenegro (scg) designation and code were used at the 2004 games.
two of the successor nations (croatia and slovenia) began to compete as independent teams at the olympics starting at the 1992 winter games and bosnia and herzegovina at the 1992 summer games and as of the 2008 summer olympics, all six successor nations, former socialist republics, have participated independently. kosovo, a former autonomous province, made its olympic debut as an independent national team at the 2016 summer olympics.
1912 as part of austria serbia (srb)
1920–1936 kingdom of yugoslavia kingdom of yugoslavia (yug)
1948–1988 socialist federal republic of yugoslavia sfr yugoslavia (yug)
1992 w croatia (cro) slovenia (slo) socialist federal republic of yugoslavia sfr yugoslavia (yug)
1992 s bosnia and herzegovina (bih) independent olympic participants (iop)
1994 ban on participation by the un
1996–/
serbia and montenegro (scg)
2008–
2016– serbia (srb) kosovo (kos)
serbia (srb) (1912, 2008–current) 5 6 7 11 24 5 0 0 0 0 10 6 7 11 24
yugoslavia (yug) (1920–1992 w) 16 26 29 28 83 14 0 3 1 4 30 26 32 29 87
independent olympic participants (iop) (1992 s) 1 0 1 2 3 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 2 3
serbia and montenegro (scg) (1996–2006) 3 2 4 3 9 3 0 0 0 0 6 2 4 3 9
croatia (cro) (1992–current) 8 14 13 14 41 9 4 6 1 11 17 18 19 15 52
slovenia (slo) (1992–current) 8 8 9 11 28 9 4 8 12 24 17 12 17 23 52
bosnia and herzegovina (bih) (1992 s –current) 8 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 16 0 0 0 0
north macedonia (mkd) (1996–current) 7 0 1 1 2 7 0 0 0 0 14 0 1 1 2
montenegro (mne) (2008–current) 4 0 1 0 1 4 0 0 0 0 8 0 1 0 1
kosovo (kos) (2016–current) 2 3 0 0 3 2 0 0 0 0 4 3 0 0 3
total 25 59 65 70 194 22 8 17 14 39 47 67 82 84 233
others
in addition to the teams of independent olympians at the olympic games mentioned above—kuwait, russia, the former netherlands antilles, and the former yugoslavia—several other nocs were represented by independent olympic athletes. east timor's team in 2000 consisted of four athletes competing as individual olympic athletes. in 2012, one independent olympic athlete represented south sudan. in the 2014 winter olympics, the team from india included one independent olympic participant.
obsolete nations notes
anz → aus, nzl australasia (anz) was a combined team of athletes from australia (aus) and new zealand (nzl). they competed together during th games.
boh → tch → cze, svk prior to the foundation of czechoslovakia (tch) after world war i, athletes from bohemia (boh) (now part of the present-day czech republic) competed in 1900, 1908, and 1912 games. czechoslovakia competed in 1920–1992, from 1994 represented by successor nocs of czech republic (cze) and slovakia (svk).
bwi → bar, jam, tto athletes from barbados (bar), jamaica (jam), and trinidad and tobago (tri) competed as the british west indies (bwi) at the 1960 games. the west indies federation only existed as a nation from 1958–1962, so the constituent nations once again competed independently in 1964.
saa, eua, gdr, frg → ger germany (ger) competed 1896–1952 and from 1992. due to the partition of germany after world war ii, germany was represented by two teams at the 1952 games — germany (ger) and the saar (saa). the saar was reintegrated back into the federal republic of germany o, and saar athletes then competed for germany. east germany did not contribute athletes to the 1952 team, as the national olympic committee for the german democratic republic was only granted "provisional" recognition by the ioc in 1955. for the games of 1956–1964, germany participated as a united team of germany (eua), representing the national olympic committees of both west germany and east germany. retrospectively, the ioc uses the country code eua for this team. after the noc for the german democratic republic was granted full recognition by the ioc in 1968, east germany (gdr) and west germany (frg) competed as two independent teams from the 1968 to the 1988 games.
mal, nbo → mas athletes from malaya (mal) and north borneo (nbo) competed as independent teams at the 1956 games and malaya also competed at the 1960 games, prior to the formation of the federation of malaysia (mas) in 1963.
aho the netherlands antilles (aho), an autonomous country within the netherlands (ned), competed 1952–2008. the netherlands antilles olympic committee's membership in the ioc was withdrawn in 2011 because of the dissolution of the netherlands antilles.
ru1 → urs → eun → rus russian empire (ru1) participated at the 1900 games prior to world war i. the soviet union (urs) competed fro. unified team (eun) is the generic name used for a combined team of six post-soviet republics that competed at the 1992 winter olympics and a combined team of twelve post-soviet republics that competed at the 1992 summer olympics. russian federation (rus) and the other fourteen post-soviet republics started competing independently in 1992 (latvia, lithuania, estonia).
srb, yug to 1992, yug/scg serbia (srb, 1912, 2006–current) first participated at the olympic games in 1912. yugoslavia (yug, 1920–1992 winter) competed as kingdom of yugoslavia (officially the kingdom of serbs, croats and slovenes until 1929) in five games (1920–1936) before the second world war. they later competed as socialist federal republic of yugoslavia for the games (1948–1992 winter). this ended with the breakup of yugoslavia. some ex-yugoslavian nations (croatia, slovenia, bosnia and herzegovina) have competed as independent teams since 1992. individual athletes from the federal republic of yugoslavia (serbia and montenegro) competed as independent olympic participants (iop) at the 1992 summer games because of sanctions placed by the united nations. athletes representing macedonia likewise competed as independent olympic participants that year because their noc had not yet been formed, but since 1996 macedonia has competed as an independent team. the team of the state union of serbia and montenegro (scg, 2004–2006) consisted of serbia and montenegro, until 2006 when montenegro seceded from the union. this team competed as yugoslavia (yug) from 1996–2002 and then changed to serbia and montenegro (2004–2006). after 96 years serbia returned to the olympics as an independent team at the 2008 games. montenegro first participated as an independent team in 2008.
yar, ymd → yem prior to yemeni unification in 1990, north yemen participated as the yemen arab republic (yar) i, and south yemen participated as the yemen democratic republic (ymd) at the 1988 games. after forming united republic yemen (yem) has participated since 1992.
roc → chn, tpe the republic of china was designated as china at the 1932, 1936, and 1948 games and was representing all of china (including taiwan). after the chinese civil war, the people's republic of china (chn) and chinese taipei (tpe) have participated as separate teams.
zzx special code used by the ioc to refer to medals won by athletes of multiple nations competing together, which was common in early games (1896–1904). these medals are not included in the respective totals for each nation represented by individual mixed team athletes.
iop, ioa, oar, roc special codes used by the ioc for athletes whose noc is not recognized by ioc. at the 1992 summer olympics fifty eight athletes from former yugoslavia competed as independent olympic participants (iop). at the 2000 summer olympics four athletes from east timor competed as individual olympic athletes (ioa). at the 2012 summer olympics three athletes from former netherlands antilles and one athlete from south sudan competed as independent olympic athletes (ioa). at the 2014 winter olympics three athletes from india competed as independent olympic participants (iop). at the 2016 summer olympics nine athletes from kuwait competed as independent olympic athletes (ioa). at the 2018 winter olympics 168 athletes from russia competed as olympics athletes from russia (oar). since the 2020 summer olympics athletes from russia are competing as russian olympic committee (roc).
name changes notes
biz belize participated under its former name of british honduras (hbr) i.
ben benin was known as dahomey (dah) in 1972.
bur burkina faso was known as upper volta (vol) in 1972.
tpe2 after the chinese civil war, chinese taipei (tpe) participated using the name of the republic of china at the 1956, 1960 (winter) games and using taiwan designation at th games. in 1979, the ioc started to use chinese taipei to refer to the noc, a compromise that was acceptable for the people's republic of china (chn) that led to the start of its participation in the olympic games. the name chinese taipei was first used in 1984. participation of the republic of china, representing all of china (including taiwan), in 1932 games are not counted in taiwan's total participation count.
cod the democratic republic of the congo was known as zaire (zai) betwee.
civ côte d'ivoire was known as ivory coast betwee.
egy egypt participated as the united arab republic (uar) betwee.
gbr includes medals won by athletes from the united kingdom of great britain and ireland (1896–1920) and the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland (1924–present), both of which used the name "great britain" and the country code gbr.
gha prior to ghana's independence in 1957, gold coast participated in the 1952 games.
guy prior to guyana's independence in 1966, british guiana participated fro.
hkg totals of hong kong (hkg) includes all medals won by athletes representing the hong kong national olympic committee, designated as "hong kong" from 1952–1996 and "hong kong, china" since 2000.
mkd north macedonia was known as macedonia, or more formally the former yugoslav republic of macedonia due to a naming dispute with greece, betwee.
mya myanmar was known as burma (bir) betwee.
sam samoa was known as western samoa betwee.
sri sri lanka was known as ceylon (cey) betwee.
swz eswatini was known as swaziland betwee.
tan although tanganyika and zanzibar had already merged to form tanzania in april 1964, the nation was designated tanganyika in the official report of the 1964 games.
zam zambia achieved independence on the last day of the 1964 games, but had participated as northern rhodesia (nrh) during those games.
zim prior to zimbabwe's independence in 1980, southern rhodesia participated as rhodesia (rho) in 1928, 1960, and 1964 games.
participation notes
a brunei's participation in the 1988 games consisted only of a single official, but no competing athletes. this participation is not counted in brunei's participation total.
b djibouti at the 2004 games took part in the opening ceremony, but neither athlete competed, so this participation is not counted in djibouti's participation total.
c liberia's athletes withdrew from 1980 games after marching in the opening ceremony and took part in the boycott. this participation is not counted in liberia's participation total.
d libya marched in the opening ceremony of the 1964 games, but then withdrew from competition. this participation is not counted in libya's participation total.
e suriname at the 1960 games took part in the opening ceremony, but its lone athlete withdrew from games due to a scheduling error. participation of suriname at the 1960 games not recognized by ioc, so this participation is not counted in suriname's participation total.
f india's athletes originally competed at the 2014 games as independent olympic participants and marched under the olympic flag during the opening ceremony due to the indian olympic association's suspension. on february 11, 2014, the indian olympic association was reinstated and india's athletes were allowed the option to compete under their own flag from that time onward.
ia ib does not include the participation of east timor's and netherlands antilles's athletes as individual olympic athletes (ioa) at the 2000 summer olympics and the 2012 summer olympics.
za zb zc zd ze zf zg zh zi zj zk zl zm does not include medals won as part of mixed teams with athletes from other nations (1896–1904).
disputed participation notes
h the bulgarian olympic committee claims that charles champaud, a swiss gymnastics teacher living in sofia, competed for the nation in 1896. bulgarian participation at the 1896 games is recognized by the ioc.
i the chilean olympic committee claims that luis subercaseaux errázuriz, a chilean diplomat and athlete, competed for the nation in 1896. chilean participation at the 1896 games is recognized by the ioc.
j some sources consider léon thiércelin, a fencer who competed at the 1900 games, of haitian nationality and therefore the first olympic appearance by haiti. participation of haiti at the 1900 games is not recognized by the ioc, so this participation is not counted in haiti's participation total.
k some sources consider freydoun malkom, a fencer who competed at the 1900 games, of persian nationality and therefore the first olympic appearance by iran. participation of iran at the 1900 games is not recognized by the ioc, so this participation is not counted in iran's participation total.
l some sources consider carlos de candamo, a fencer who competed at the 1900 games, of peruvian nationality and therefore the first olympic appearance by peru. participation of peru at the 1900 games is not recognized by the ioc, so this participation is not counted in peru's participation total.
m enrico brusoni's gold medal in the cycling men's points race at the 1900 summer olympics is recognized by the italian national olympic committee as well as the ioc as being won in a 1900 summer olympics event, although some sources state it was unofficial.
n monaco earned a bronze in the art competitions at the 1924 summer olympics. however, medals in art competitions are no longer recognized by the ioc.
oa ob michel théato, a french athlete who won the gold medal in marathon at the 1900 games, was born in luxembourg. the ioc does not recognize luxembourg participation at the 1900 games and attributes his medal to france.
the nationalities of many medalists at the 1904 olympics are disputed as many competitors were recent immigrants to the united states who had not yet been granted us citizenship.
pa pb sources are inconsistent regarding albert corey's participation in 1904, who immigrated to the united states from france. the games report refers to corey as a "frenchman wearing the colors of the chicago athletic association", but the ioc attributes his medal in the marathon to the united states, and in contradiction, the medal in the four mile team race (that was won by a team of three americans and corey) to a mixed team composed of athletes from multiple nations instead of just the united states.
qa qb the international olympic committee considers norwegian-american wrestlers charles ericksen and bernhoff hansen who immigrated from norway to the united states to have competed for the united states. each man won a gold medal. in 2012, norwegian historians however found documentation showing that ericksen did not receive american citizenship until march 22, 1905, and that hansen, who was registered as an "alien" (foreigner) as late as 1925, probably never received american citizenship. the historians have therefore petitioned the ioc to have the athletes registered as norwegians. in may 2013 it was reported that the norwegian olympic committee had filed a formal application for changing the nationality of the wrestlers in the ioc's medal database.
r bob fowler, an american marathon runner who competed at the 1904 games, was a native newfoundlander, newfoundland is occasionally listed as a separate country at the 1904 olympics, and would be listed as an historical noc without medals. participation of newfoundland at the 1904 games is not recognized by the ioc.
s in 2009, historians from the international society of olympic historians discovered that cyclist frank bizzoni was an italian citizen when he competed in 1904 being granted us citizenship in 1917. however, the ioc does not officially recognize italy's participation in the 1904 olympics.
fm the ioc counts one gold, one silver, and two bronze medals won by american fencer albertson van zo post for cuba instead of the united states. the one silver and one bronze medal won by american charles tatham are also counted for cuba instead of the united states.
all-time paralympic games medal table
all-time youth olympic games medal table
olympic medal table
list of first olympic gold medalists by country
list of participating nations at the summer olympic games
list of participating nations at the winter olympic games
list of multiple olympic gold medalists
list of multiple olympic gold medalists at a single games
list of multiple olympic gold medalists in one event
list of multiple olympic medalists
list of multiple olympic medalists at a single games
list of multiple olympic medalists in one event
list of olympic teams by medals won
"olympic games - sochi 2014 | winter summer past and future olympics". international olympic committee.
"alpinism, open". olymadmen.
verma, somesh (17 aug 2012). "the faceless hero nepal's only olympic gold medalist in focus". the kathmandu post. archived from the original o.
"luxembourg at the 1900 paris summer games".
"what events are olympic?".
"alpinism, open (1932)". olymadmen.
"alpinism, open (1936)". olymadmen.
"aeronautics at the 1936 summer olympics". olymadmen.
"the west indies shipping corporation act" (pdf).
the failure of the west indies federation
the west indies gazette: chapter i of the constitution
west indies (federation) order in counci august 2017 at the wayback machine
united states defense areas in the federation of the west indies: agreement, with annexes, between the united states of america and the federation of the west indies signed at port of spain february 10, 1961
jamaica's brexit: remembering the west indian federation
decolonising the caribbean: dutch policies in a comparative perspective - the failure of the west indian federation
era bell thompson, "black leaders of the west indies", ebony, october 1967.
ayearst, morley; lowenthal, david (june 1961). "the west indies federation: perspectives on a new nation". political science quarterly. 76 (2): 291. doi:10.2307/2146224. jstor 2146224.
 page 230
"west indies federation at the 1960 rome summer games". sports reference. archived from the original o.
"ioc suspends kuwait's national olympic committee". usa today.
"suspension of the kuwait olympic committee". olympics.
"independent olympic athletes". rio2016.com. rio 2016 organising committee for the olympic and paralympic games. archived from the original o.
"curtain comes down on 123rd ioc session". olympic.org.
"curtain comes down on 123rd ioc session". olympic.org. international olympic committee.
m. avé, comité olympique français. les jeux de la viiie olympiade paris 1924 – rapport officiel (pdf) (in french). paris: librairie de france. archived from the original (pdf) o. 39 seulement s'alignérent, ne représentant plus que 24 nations, la chine, le portugal et la yougoslavie ayant déclaré forfait.
"team usa has more medals in the summer olympics than the next two countries combined". businessinsider. july 28, 2016. retrieved february 10, 2022.
"all-time olympic games medal tally (summer olympics)". topendsports. august 2021. retrieved february 10, 2022.
"medal standings for all olympic games". olympteka. february 2022. retrieved february 10, 2022.
"chart:the united states dominates when it comes to olympic gold medals". businessinsider. february 13, 2014. retrieved february 10, 2022.
"countries with the most summer olympic medals". worldatlas the original online geography resource. july 23, 2021. retrieved february 10, 2022.
letter to the secretary-general of the united nations from the president of the russian federation
murphy, sean d. (2002). united states practice in international law: 1999–2001. vol. 1. cambridge university press. p. 130. isbn 978-0-521-75070-7.
watkins, ginger t., ed. (1997). the official report of the centennial olympic games, volume iii the competition results (pdf). atlanta: peachtree publishers. pp. viii–ix. isbn 1-56145-150-9.
sydney organising committee for the olympic games (2001). "national olympic committees". official report of the xxvii olympiad, volume three: results (pdf). sydney organising committee for the olympic games. pp. 1–5. isbn 0-957.
skarveli, efharis; zervos, isabel, eds. (november 2005). official report of the xxviii olympiad, volume two: the games (pdf). athens 2004 organising committee for the olympic games. pp. 528–529. isbn 960-8.
"cycling at the 1900 paris summer games: men's points race". sports reference. archived from the original o.
"paris 1900". international olympic committee. nocs: 24 athletes: 997 (22 women, 975 men) events: 95 the ioc website affirms a total of 95 medal events, which has been the recommendation of olympic historian bill mallon regarding events that should be considered "olympic".
"italy - olympic summer games". international olympic committee.
"monaco at the 1924 summer olympics".
"when the olympics gave out medals for art | arts & culture | smithsonian". smithsonian magazine. .
"france at the 1904 st. louis summer games".
"norway at the 1904 st. louis summer games".
"her er beviset som endrer norsk idrettshistorie". nrk. august 14, 2012.
"usa-guld 1904 var norges". svenska dagbladet. august 14, 2012.
"norges ol-historie skrives på nytt". nettavisen. may 3, 2013. archived from the original on december 12, 2013. retrieved february 8, 2018.
"bob fowler".
mallon, bill; heijmans, jeroen (11 august 2011). historical dictionary of the olympic movement – italy. isbn 9780810875227. retrieved july 31, 2014.
"frank bizzoni olympic results".
all-time medal counts are compiled by various sources, often adding up related results for russia, germany, serbia, czech republic, etc.
olympiastatistik.de (2006)
nbc archived  at the wayback machine
"historical medals – vancouver2010.com". archived from the original on march 13, 2010. retrieved march 15, 2010.
historical medals - london2012.com (summer games, not corrected for disqualifications afte)
all-time olympic medals - series of interactive maps
olympanalyt.com - medals by countries
sources
international olympic committee medal database
official olympic reports
olympic rings without rims.svg olympic games medal tables
olympic games medal winners
lists of olympic medalists
olympic rings without rims.svg olympic games
olympic rings without rims.svg olympics and ipc logo (2019).svg paralympics statistics
medal tables of olympics, paralympics and world championships by sport
portal:
olympics
categories: medal tables at multi-sport eventsolympic games medal tablesolympic medalsolympics-related lists
history
competition
toggle competition subsection
architecture
literature
music
painting
sculpture
notable competitors
all-time medal table (1912–1948)
toggle all-time medal table (1912–1948) subsection
winners by olympics
art competitions at the summer olympics
for other uses, see delphic games of the modern era.
this article needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
find sources: "art competitions at the summer olympics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (february 2013) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
art competitions formed part of the modern olympic games during its early years, fro. the competitions were part of the original intention of the olympic movement's founder, pierre de frédy, baron de coubertin. medals were awarded for works of art inspired by sport, divided into five categories: architecture, literature, music, painting, and sculpture.
the juried art competitions were abandoned in 1954 because artists were considered to be professionals, while olympic athletes were required to be amateurs. since 1956, the olympic cultural programme has taken their place.
with the founding of the international olympic committee (ioc) in 1894, and the celebration of the first modern olympic games, french baron pierre de coubertin saw the fulfillment of his ideals—men being educated in both mind and body, and competing in sport rather than war. one of his other desires was to combine both art and sport, and he thus considered including artistic competition in the olympic games.
in may 1906, baron de coubertin organised a meeting in paris for both ioc members and representatives of artists' organisations. the meeting ended with a proposal to the ioc to organise artistic competitions at the olympic games in five areas (architecture, literature, music, painting, and sculpture). the works of art entered had to be inspired by sports.
preparations were underway to hold such competitions at the 1908 summer olympics, which were scheduled for rome, italy. but the italian organisers were faced with financial troubles due to the vesuvius eruption of 1906, and were forced to halt preparations, and the ioc awarded the organisation to london in 1907. the british organisers planned to hold the art competitions, but because of the short preparation time, they were cancelled. the organisers felt that artists would not have enough time to send in their works.
pierre de coubertin was not discouraged, and sought to include the artistic events in the programme of the 1912 summer olympics, to be held in stockholm, sweden. although the swedes initially objected, opposing the idea of art combined with competition, they eventually gave in. the number of entrants was rather disappointing: only 35 artists are known to have sent works of art to sweden, but gold medals were awarded in all five categories.
when the first post-war olympic games were held in war-ravaged belgium, art contests were again on the programme, although they were little more than a sideshow. this was different for the 1924 summer olympics in paris. the contests were taken seriously for the first time, and 193 artists submitted works. this figure included three soviet artists, even though the soviet union officially did not take part in the olympic games, which they considered to be a "bourgeois" festival.
the growth continued at the 1928 amsterdam olympics, where over 1,100 works of art were exhibited in the municipal museum, not including the submissions in literature, music and architecture. artists were allowed to sell their works at the close of the exhibition, which was rather controversial given the ioc's amateurism policy, which required all competitors to be amateurs. in amsterdam, the number of events was also increased, as four of the five fields of art were subdivided, creating more events.
because of the economy and the remote location of los angeles, participation in the athletic events of the 1932 games was lower than that of 1928. the art competition did not suffer from this problem, and the number of art works entered remained stable. their exhibition drew 384,000 visitors to the los angeles museum of history, science and art. art contests were also held in berlin (1936) and london (1948), with reasonable success, although the number of entered works had significantly dropped by 1948.
in 1949, a report was presented at the ioc meeting in rome which concluded that practically all contestants in the art competitions were professionals, and that the competitions should therefore be abolished and replaced with an exhibition without awards or medals. this sparked a heated debate within the ioc. at a 1951 meeting, the ioc decided to reinstate the competitions for the 1952 olympics in helsinki. however, the organisers claimed there was insufficient time, and an art competition was not held. an art exhibition took place in its stead.
the issue continued to be debated within the olympic movement, and at the 49th ioc session in athens, 1954, the ioc members voted to replace the art contests with an exhibition for future olympics. several attempts have been made to re-include them, but without success.
despite no longer holding art competitions, the olympic games continue to be connected with art exhibitions. the olympic charter required organisers of the olympic games to include a programme of cultural events, to "serve to promote harmonious relations, mutual understanding and friendship among the participants and others attending the olympic games".
fro rules of the art competition varied, but the core of the rules remained the same. all of the entered works had to be inspired by sport, and had to be original (that is, not be published before the competition). like in the athletic events at the olympics, gold, silver, and bronze medals were awarded to the highest ranked artists, although not all medals were awarded in each competition. on a few occasions, in fact, no medals were presented at all.
generally, it was permitted for artists to enter multiple works, although a maximum number was sometimes established. this made it possible for an artist to win multiple prizes in a single competition.
at one time or another, there were suggestions to also include dancing, film, photography, or theatre, but none of these art forms was ever included in the olympic games as a medal event. however, breakdancing will be included in the paris 2024 olympics.
the 1928 olympic stadium, designed by jan wils, won the gold medal in architecture at the 1928 olympics.
until the amsterdam games in 1928, the architectural competition was not divided into categories. the 1928 games introduced a town planning category. however, the division was not always clear, and some designs were awarded prizes in both categories.
entries in this category were allowed to have been "published" before the olympics. a notable example of this is the 1928 gold medal for architecture awarded to jan wils for his design of the olympic stadium used in the same olympics.
the literature competitions were divided into a varied number of categories. until 1924 and again in 1932, there was only a single literature category. in 1928, separate categories were introduced for dramatic, epic, and lyric literature. awards in these categories were also presented in 1948, while the drama category was dropped in 1936.
entered works were limited in length (20,000 words) and could be submitted in any language, provided they were accompanied by english and/or french translations or summaries (rules varied over the years).
a single event for music was held until 1936, when three categories were introduced: one for orchestral music, one for instrumental music, and one for both solo and choral music. in 1948, these categories were slightly modified into choral/orchestral, instrumental/chamber, and vocal music.
the juries often had trouble judging the pieces, which were entered on paper. possibly related to the problematic judging, juries frequently decided to award only a few prizes. on two occasions, no award was given out at all (in the 1924 music category and in the 1936 instrumental music category).
1936 marked the only occasion when the winning musical works were actually played before an audience.
josef suk is the only well-known musician to have competed, winning a silver medal in 1932.
jean jacoby is the only artist to win two gold medals. he won his second with the above drawing, titled rugby.
as with the other art forms, a single painting category was on the program until 1928, when it was split out into three sub-categories: drawings, graphic arts, and paintings. the categories then changed at each of the following olympic games. in 1932, the three categories were: paintings, prints, and watercolors/drawings. four years later, the prints category had disappeared, and had been replaced by graphic arts and commercial graphic art. at the final olympic art competition, the three categories were applied arts and crafts, engravings/etchings, and oils/water colours.
the sculpture class had only a single category until 1928, when two separate competitions were designated; one for statues and one for reliefs and medals. in 1936, this was split up further, separating reliefs and medals into their own categories.
while several of the olympic art medalists have achieved at least national fame, few of them can be considered well-known artists globally. in fact, the 1924 games featured better-known jury members than artists, with artists like selma lagerlöf and igor stravinsky judging the entered works.
judging by the medals won, luxembourg painter jean jacoby is the most successful olympic artist, winning the gold medal for his 1924 painting étude de sport, and for his drawing rugby in 1928. swiss artist alex diggelmann won three medals, a gold one in 1936 (for his poster arosa i placard), and a silver and a bronze in the 1948 applied arts & crafts class, both with commercial posters. danish writer josef petersen won a silver medal on three occasions: in 1924, 1932, and 1948.
alfréd hajós is one of only two olympians to have won medals in both sport and art competitions
only two persons have won olympic medals in both sport and art competitions. walter w. winans, an american who lived in england, won a gold medal as a marksman at the 1908 summer olympics in the running deer (double shot) competition. in 1912, he won another shooting medal—silver this time—in the running deer team competition. by then, he had already won a gold medal for his sculpture an american trotter. the other olympian with successes in both fields is alfréd hajós of hungary. as a swimmer, he won two gold medals at the 1896 athens olympics. twenty-eight years later, he was awarded a silver medal in architecture for his stadium design, co-designed with dezső lauber.
two presidents of the international olympic committee have also been among the entrants in the olympic art competitions. in 1912 pierre de coubertin, under the pseudonym "georges hohrod and martin eschbach", entered ode to sport, which won the gold medal. avery brundage, who competed as an athlete at the 1912 games, entered literary works at th olympics, earning an honorary mention in 1932. he would serve as the ioc's president fro.
britain's john copley, winner of a silver medal in the 1948 engravings and etchings competition, was 73 years of age, making him the oldest olympic medallist in history. the oldest olympic medallist outside the art competitions is swedish shooter oscar swahn, who won his last medal at age 72.
main article: list of olympic medalists in art competitions
rank nation gold silver bronze total
ireland (irl) 0 1 2 3
south africa (rsa) 0 1 1 2
totals (23 entries) 45 53 49 147
stockholm 1912 (5)
antwerp 1920 (5)
paris 1924 (5)
amsterdam 1928 (13)
los angeles 1932 (9)
berlin 1936 (15)
london 1948 (14)
jeux de la francophonie
list of lgbt artists at the olympic games
"archived copy" (pdf).
"breakdancing, surfing among four sports to win paris 2024 olympics spots". france 24. .
stanton, richard (2001). the forgotten olympic art competitions. victoria: trafford publishing. isbn 1-55212-606-4. (book in french) guillain jean-yves, art & olympisme. histoire du concours de peinture, paris, atlantica, 2004. isbn 2-84394-763-4.
kramer, bernhard (may 2004). "in search of the lost champions of the olympic art contests" (pdf). journal of olympic history. 12 (2): 29–34. archived (pdf) from the original o.
wagner, juergen. "olympic art competitions / contests 1912–1948". olympic games museum. archived from the original o.
(ed). bergvall, erik (december 1913). the olympic games of stockholm 1912 official report (pdf). stockholm: wahlström and widstrand. pp. 806–811. archived from the original (pdf) o. {{cite book}}: |author= has generic name (help)
olympic games antwerp 1920 — official report (pdf) (in french). belgian olympic committee. 1957. p. 80. archived from the original (pdf) o.
(ed.) m. avé, comité olympique français. les jeux de la viiie olympiade paris 1924 - rapport officiel (pdf) (in french). paris: librairie de france. pp. 601–612. archived from the original (pdf) o. {{cite book}}: |author= has generic name (help)
g. van rossem, ed. (1928). the ninth olympiad. amsterdam 1928. official report (pdf). amsterdam: j. h. de bussy. pp. 877–901. archived from the original (pdf) o.
the games of the xth olympiad los angeles 1932 (pdf). xth olympiade committee of the games of los angeles, u.s.a. 1932. 1933. pp. 748–765. archived from the original (pdf) o.
diem, carl (1937). xith olympic games, berlin 1936 official report (pdf). berlin: wilhelm limpert. pp. 1106–1123. archived from the original (pdf) o.
(ed.) lord burghley (1951). the official report of the organising committee for the xiv olympiad (pdf). london: organising committee for the xiv olympiad. pp. 535–537. archived from the original (pdf) o. {{cite book}}: |author= has generic name (help)
olympic rings without rims.svg sports at the olympic games
categories: art competitions at the olympic gamesdiscontinued sports at the summer olympics
historical
scope
list of major multi-sport events
toggle list of major multi-sport events subsection
component games
national congress of state games
list of multi-sport events
an athletics event in the 2008 summer olympics. the olympic games, part of the olympic movement, was the first major, modern, multi-sport event of international significance.
a multi-sport event is an organized sporting event, often held over multiple days, featuring competition in many different sports between organized teams of athletes from (mostly) nation-states. events are typically held over a few days to accommodate the large number of events held, often more than those in single-sport competitions. the first major, modern, multi-sport event of international significance was the modern olympic games. some of the most recognised sporting events in the world today are multi-sport events – the asian games, the commonwealth games, the pan american games and the mediterranean games – among others. this article lists all major multi-sport events, whether defunct or functioning, in the modern day. a full listing of all major multi-sport events is provided in the table below.
transnational multi-sport events are often organised across concords of cultural elements between nations. these include language, such as the francophone games for french-speaking nations; ethnic, such as the maccabiah games for jewish athletes; political, such as the spartakiad used to oppose the olympics; occupation, such as the universiade for university students; and gender, such as world outgames for the gay community. participation is also delineated across other lines including region, religion, age, and season (winter instead of summer). a number of multi-sport events are held within nations, where athletes representing various intra-national states or districts compete against each other; these include the thailand national games and the national games of china. these differences in intended audiences are highlighted in the table.
further information: history of sport
prior to the modern day, there were instances of multi-sport events held centuries or millennia in the past. the tailteann games, held near modern telltown in ireland, was one of the first multi-sport festivals to be recorded, with a history that traces back to 1829 bc. there were several other games held in europe in the classical era. the panhellenic games encompassed the ancient olympic games, which was the precursor to the modern olympic games; the pythian games; the nemean games; and the isthmian games. the roman games, held in ancient rome, focused on greek sports as well as the etruscan sport of gladiatorial combat. other multi-sport festivals emerged in the middle ages in europe, including the cotswold olimpick games in england, the highland games in scotland still in existence today, and the olympiade de la république in france in the 19th century.
as these multi-sport events or festivals occurred pre-20th century, when the rules for today's modern sports were largely different or yet to be established, these are not included in the table. the events noted in this section documents all known historical multi-sport events.
multi-sport events can be classified by scope. some cater to international audiences; some to regional audiences; and some are held within nations. these differences are presented in the table as well, in addition to other divisions such as ethnicity and historical origins as described earlier.
only a few modern multi-sport events cater to international audiences without cultural or political boundaries. the most famous of these is the olympic games. the others are namely the world games, established to host sports not within the olympic scope; the world mind sports games, which hosts competitions in mind sports which are not found in either of the two abovementioned events; the x games and the winter x games, organised for extreme action sports; the world combat games, for martial arts and combat sports; and the now-cancelled goodwill games.
similarly, there are also regional multi-sport events held that purely cater to regional audiences regardless of cultural and/or political elements. these are often grouped by continent and sub-continental regions. each continent has at least one major continental games; the asian games are held for athletes in asia; in africa, the african games perform the same continental function, and in the americas, the largest multi-sport event that fits the description is the pan american games; countries in oceania compete in the pacific games, while europe has two similar events, the european games organised by the european olympic committees in the tradition of the olympic games, and the european championships, organised by a group of european sports federations.
on a sub-continental and regional level, the central asian games, the east asian games, the south asian games and the southeast asian games cater to central asia, east asia, south asia and southeast asia respectively, which are all regions of the asian continent. the various regions of the americas are catered for by the south american games, the central american and caribbean games and the central american games. the games of the small states of europe caters for the various island nations and micronations around europe, while europe provides the majority of competitors in the mediterranean games.
the criteria in listing a multi-sport event is as follows: the event should have received significant media coverage where it is covered; national, regional, or international. at the same time, organization of the event is taken charge by a formal body, with at least one sport in the event sanctioned by an international sports federation that is recognized by the international olympic committee or the general association of international sports federations (gaisf).
title est.1 next/ last2 rec.3 location4 scope elem.5 notes
aau junior olympic games 1967 2023, des moines national age
academic olympia 1909
afro-asian games 2003 2003
alba games 2005 2011
african games 1965 2023, accra regional
african beach games 2019 2023, tunis regional
african francophone games for the handicapped 1994
african martial arts games
africa military games 2002
african para games 2023 2023, accra regional
african youth games 2010 2022, cairo regional age
agbu games 1955
agbu european games 2002
agbu south american games 2002
alice springs masters games 1986 2023, alice springs national age
all-africa university games 1975 2024, lagos regional school
all-china games 2000
alps-adriatic summer youth games 1984 2016
alps-adriatic winter youth games 1982 2011
arab school games 1949
arab university games
arab university games for beach sports 2016
arafura games 1991 2023, darwin international
arctic winter games 1970 2022 (2023 hold), wood buffalo regional
armenian students sports games 2002
arnold sports festival 1984 2023, columbus international
asean autism games 2012 2020
asean civil servant games 2015
asean deaf games 2022 2022, kuala lumpur regional disabled
asean para games 2001 2023, phnom penh regional disabled
asean school games 2009 2022, dumaguete regional school
asean university games 1981 2024, surabaya regional school
asem youth games 2005
asian beach games 2008 2020 (2023 hold), sanya regional
asian games 1951 2022 (2023 hold), hangzhou regional
asian indoor games 2005 2009 -martial arts games
asian indoor-martial arts games 2013 2021 (2023 hold), bangkok-chonburi regional
asian martial arts games 2009 2009 -martial arts games
asian martial arts games(wmagc)
asian para games 2010 2022 (2023 hold), hangzhou regional disabled
asian transplant games 2002
asian winter games 1986 2029, trojena regional
asian youth games 2009 2025, tashkent regional age
asian youth para games 2009 2025, tashkent regional disabled, age
asia pacific deaf games 1984
asia pacific masters games 2018 2023, north jeolla regional age
asia pacific outgames 2008
asia pacific university games 2015 2015
asia pacific youth games 2010 2019 -eastern regional in russia.
asia sports festival 1998
asian university games regional age, school
ataturk dam international watersports games
atlantic watersports games 1995 2022, viana do castelo regional age
ausc region 5 youth games
aurora games
australasian police and emergency services games 2012 2023, rotorua international occupation hold between australia or new zealand
australasian public sector games 1998
australia games 1985
australia beach games
australia deaf games 1964 2024, newcastle, lake macquarie national disabled
australia police winter games
australian masters games 1987 2023, adelaide international age
australian youth olympic festival 2007 2013
balkan games 1929 2023
baltic games (extreme sports) 2009
baltic sea games 1993 1997
baltic sea youth games 1999 2019
bangladesh games 1978
batang pinoy 1999
black sea games 2007 2007
bimp-eaga friendship games 1996 2022 -eaga.
andina binational andean integration games 1998 2022.
binational games of araucanía 1992 2022, tba regional age hold between chile and argentina.
para binational games of araucanía 2022 2022, tba regional age hold between chile and argentina.
boleswa intervarsity games
bolivarian games 1938 2024, ayacucho regional colonial ties
bolivarian beach games 2012 2019
bolivarian youth games 2023, sucre regional colonial ties, age
botswana games 2005 2023
bridge olympiad 1960 2004
british transplant games 1977 2023, coventry national
jogos abertos brasileiros,(jabs) 1992 2014
jogos escolares brasileiros,(jebs) 2005 2022, 2016 rio olympics competition venue national age brazilian student games of age 12-17
jogos universitários brasileiros,(jubs) 1935 2022, brasília national age brazilian university games
jogos universitários praia brasileiros 2011, aracati national age brazilian university beach games
bsme games 2004 2022
can-am police-fire games 1977 2023, butler regional occupation
canada summer games 1969 2025 2 newfoundland and labrador st. john's, newfoundland and labrador national includes able-bodied, para sport, and special olympics events.
canada winter games 1967 2023 -bodied, para sport, and special olympics events.
canada deaf games 2012 2024, toronto national disabled
canterbury centennial games 1950
canusa games 1958 2023, hamilton regional age
caribbean games 2022
carifta games 1972 2023, nassau regional caribbean free trade association games
central african games 1976
central american and caribbean games 1926 2022 (2023 hold), san salvador regional
central american and caribbean beach games 2022, santa marta regional
central american and caribbean junior games 2024
central american games 1973 2025
central american para games 2013 2018
central asian games
central asian para games 2015
collegiate nationals 2006
chess olympiads 1924 2024, budapest international age
children of asia games 1996 2024, yakutsk regional age
winter children of asia games
china national youth games 2015 2019
chinese transplant games
cis games 2021 2023, tba regional for athletes in cis organization nations
citizens sports games 2000 2024, pingtung county national non-olympics events
commonwealth games 1930 2026, victoria international colonial ties, language for athletes in commonwealth nations.
commonwealth paraplegic games 1962 1974, language, age defunct
commonwealth winter games 1958 1966, language, age defunct
commonwealth youth games 2000 2021 (2023 hold),tba international colonial ties, language, age
community games 1967
cook islands games 2020 2022
cook islands beach games 2018 2024
cook islands university games
counter olympics 1932
country senior high schools carnival (western australia)
world summer corporate games 1988 2022, constanța international also has regional or national events
world winter corporate games 2019 2022, brasov international
costarican university games (juncos)
cpisra world games 1989 2018
cplp games 1990 2018, language
csit world sports games 2009 2023, rome international
cucsa games 1996 2022
summer deaflympics 1924 2025, tokyo international disabled longest running multi-sport event excluding the olympic games.
winter deaflympics 1949 2023, quebec city international disabled
deaf sports carnivals 1911
défi sportif 1984 2023, quebec international disabled
dod warrior games 2010 2023, canton international occupation, disabled for injured military. held by department of defense, the united states.
east african community games
east african military games 1982
east african military community games 2005
east african schools games 2002 2019
eastern africa university games 1999 2022, kampala regional age
east asian games 1993 2013. transform to east asian youth games.
east asian youth games 2023 2023, ulaanbaatar regional age
eastern european transplant games 1996
egames 2016 2016
elderly sports and fitness conference of people's republic of china 2009 2017
esports games of the future 2023, saransk national esports
eurogames 1992 2023, bern regional sexual orientation
european championships (multi-sport event) 2018 2026
european games 2015 2023, kraków regional
european company sports games of summer 1977, bordeaux regional
european company sports games of winter 1990, bordeaux regional
european heart/lung transplant games] 1988 2024
european maccabi games 1963 2023
european martial arts games
european masters games 2008 2023, tampere regional age
european para championships 2023, rotterdam regional
european para games regional disabled
european para youth game tba regional age
european para winter youth games.
european police and fire games 2006 2020
european sports festival 2019
european transplant and dialysis games 2000 2024
european universities games 2012 2024, debrecen, miskolc regional school
european winter games (for police & firefighter & paramedics) 2019 2023, kuopio regional occupation
european youth olympic festival 1991 2023, maribor regional age
european youth olympic winter festival 1993 2023, friuli venezia giulia regional age
extremity games 2006 2016
far eastern championship games 1913 1934. precursor to the asian games.
federal youth games of olympics
federal youth games of paralympics
fespic games 1975 2006. merge into asian paralympic games.
fespic youth games 2003 2003 - regional age,disabled defunct. precursor to the asian youth para games.
festival of empire 1911
fia motorsport games 2019 2022, marseille international
ficep-fisec games 1987 2022, klagenfurt international age,religion
fiji games
fisu america games 2018 2022, mérida regional age merge with south american university games.
fisu world university summer games(summer universiade) 1959 2023, chengdu international age
fisu world university winter games(winter universiade) 1960 2023, lake placid international age
friendship games 1984 1984 - international defunct. for athletes who did not participate in the 1984 summer olympics.
friendship military spartakiads of summer 1958
friendship military spartakiads of winter 1961
fsm games,(federated states of micronesia games) 1995
games of the new emerging forces (ganefo) 1963 1963. set up by indonesia as a counter to the olympic games, with participation meant for so-called "emerging nations".
asian games of the new emerging forces (asian ganefo) 1966 1966. for antiboycott of 1966 asian games.
games of the small states of europe 1985 2023, valletta regional population size
gascoyne games 1994, carnarvon regional for the west australia intra-regional, ceased in 2015, but 2021 revive
gay games 1982 2022 (2023 hold)
gcc games 2011 2026, doha reginoal persian gulf regional nationals multi-sport event
gcc beach games 2010 2025 - oman, tba reginoal persian gulf regional nationals multi-sport event
gcc women's games -sport event
gcc youth games 2023 2023, tba reginoal age persian gulf regional nationals multi-sport event
gcc martial arts and indoor games 2024 2024, tba reginoal age persian gulf regional nationals multi-sport event
georgian universiade
german combat games 1922
global esports games 2021 2022, istanbul international organized by global esports federation, different from international esports federation.
summer goodwill games 1986 2001. reaction to the political troubles surrounding the olympic games in the 1980s.
winter goodwill games 2000 2000
gorge games 1996
winter gorge games 2009
gratitude games 2023 2023, manchester, salford national occupation for workers in the uk's nhs, police, fire service and other emergency services.
summer gravity games 1999. for extreme sport games
winter gravity games 2000. for extreme sport games
gravity games h2o 2005
hapoel games 1928
highland games 1836 2022, somewhere national hold in scotland and other countries with a large scottish diaspora
hong kong games 2007 2023
huntsman world senior games 1987 2023, st. george, utah international age
ibsa world games 1998 2023, birmingham international disabled
ibsa world youth games 2005,age
iceland winter games 2014 2022
indian ocean island games 1979 2023, antananarivo regional
indian ocean youth and sport commission games 1994
indian rim asian university games 2007
indigenous nationals 1996 2023, melbourne, monash university national ethnicity for indigenous australians with qualification in australian university or tertiary institutions.
inter-allied games 1919 1919 - regional defunct
international army games 2015 2023, moscow international occupation
international children's games 1968 2023, daegu international age
international children's winter games 1994 2023, pyeongchang international age
invictus games 2014 2023, düsseldorf international occupation for wounded, injured military.
isf educational games 2014
isf european schools games 1992
isf gymnasiade school summer games 1974 2021 (2022 hold), jinjiang international age
isf gymnasiade school winter games 2018 2023, tba international age
isf pan american schools games 2013
isf universal teacher games 2022 2022, poreč international school
isf world cool games 2019 2022, kyiv international school
isf world school beach games 2022 2022, tba international school
isf world school combat games
isf world school games u15 2021 2023,tba international age
isf world school e-sports games 2019 2022, kyiv international age e-sport
isf world school inclusive games, disabled
inter-high school championships of japan 1963 2023, hokkaido national age
international university beach games
international asa games
international asa winter games
international festival of martial arts pearl of kyrgyzstan 2017 2023
international issyk-kul sports games 2001 2023
international law enforcement games 1974
international workers' olympiads of summer 1921
international workers' olympiads of winter 1925
international youth games 2014 2022, almere international age host by 4 city: aalborg, almere, rendsburg and lancaster.
islamic games 1980
islamic solidarity games 2005, yaoundé regional involves member-states of the organisation of the islamic conference.
island games 1985 2023, guernsey regional
iwas world games 1948 2022
iwas world winter games
iwas youth world games 2005 2016, age defunct
isaf world sailing games 1994
jcc maccabi youth games 1982, fort lauderdale; israel, jerusalem national age,religion
jeux de la francophonie 1989 2023, kinshasa international colonial ties, language
jeux des îles 1997 2020 (2022 hold), calvià regional population size
jeux mondiaux de la paix 1983
jogos sul-americanos escolares 1976 2023.
jubilee games 2008
juegos deportivos de universidades centro america.
juegos deportivos escolares nacionales de peru 1993
juegos universitarios argentinos 2014
juegos universitarios nacionales de nicaragua 2014
juegos evita 1948 2022, buenos aires, neuquén, san luis national argentina national games.
junior pan american games 2021 2025, tba regional age
khelo india para games, tba national disabled
khelo india school games 2018 2018
khelo india university games 2020 2022, karnataka, jain university national age
khelo india winter games 2020 2022, gulmarg national
khelo india youth games 2020 2023, karnataka national age
kingdom games 1995 2009,netherlands antilles country, because these organization has been dissolved, so this games will not been continued.
korean national youth sports festival 1972 2023, ulsan national
korean national para games 1981 2023, south jeolla province national
korean national sports festival 1934 2023, south jeolla province national
korean national winter para games 2004 2023, seoul, gangwon, daegu–gyeongbuk national
korean national winter sports festival 1934 2023, seoul, gangwon, daegu–gyeongbuk national
korean national youth para games 2008 2023, ulsan national disabled, age
las justas
lakota nation invitational 1976 2022
latin american games 1922
latin american transplant games 1998
liberty bell classic 1980 1980 - international
lithuanian national olympics 1938 1938, but 2nd games did not held until 1998.
lusophony games, language
luso-brazilian sports games 1960
macau games 2014 2022
maccabiah games 1932 2025, jerusalem international
maccabiah winter games 1933
maccabi youth games,religion
manea games 2008 2023
masters indigenous games 2023 2023, ottawa international
mediterranean games 1951 2026, taranto regional
mediterranean beach games 2015 2023, heraklion regional
med senior games 2022 2022, liguria international age
micronesian games 1969 2023,tba regional
middle east/mediterranean scholar-athlete games 2000
cism world solidarity games 2023, tba international occupation military personnel
military winter world games 2010 2025, bern international occupation military personnel
military world games 1995 2027, bogota international occupation military personnel
military world cadet games 2010
mind sports olympiad 1997 2022, london international reduced in size after 2000.
move united junior nationals 1984 2023, birmingham, hoover national disabled,age
mtc youth games 2018 2021 (2022 hold), tba national age national youth games of namibia
naadam.
national biennual games of singapore
national community games of singapore
national games of the people's republic
of china 1910 2025, guangdong.hong kong.macau national
national para games of china 1984 2025, guangdong.hong kong.macau national disability
national winter games of china 1959 2027, tba national
national games of chile
national games of colombia 1928 2023, quindio.etc national
paranational games of colombia 2004 2023, caldas.etc national disabled
national sports games of sea and beach of colombia 2013 2023
national games of costa rica 1976 2024, guanacaste province national
paranational games of costa rica 2009
national games of india 1924 2023, goa national
national winter games of india 2007
national games of nepal
national games of pakistan 1948
national games of taiwan 1946 2023, tainan city national
national games of uruguay
national games of venezuela
national para games of venezuela
national deaf games of singapore
national disabled games of taiwan 1993 2024, nantou county national disablility
national youth games of nigeria 2016 2022, kwara, ilorin national age national youth games in nigeria.
national high school games 2001 2023, hsinchu county national
national indigenous games of taiwan 1999 2023, taipei national ethnicity
national intellectual games 2009 2023, hefei national china mind sports games.
national intercity games of the people's republic of china 1988 2015
national intercollegiate athletic games 1970 2023, taoyuan city, chung yuan christian university national age
national intercollegiate deaf athletic games 2000
national children and youth olympiad of mexico 1996
national paralympic week 1957 2024, tba national
national peasants' games 1988 2016, 2012 is last edition.
national red games 2010
national school games of singapore
national sports festival of japan 1946 2023, kagoshima prefecture national
national sports week 1948 2024, aceh–north sumatra, tba national
national sports winter festival of japan 2005 2023, aomori prefecture national
national sports tournament for the disabled of japan 2001 2023, kagoshima prefecture national disabled
national high school student sports games of the people's republic of china 1973
national university student sports games of the people's republic of china 1982
national universiade
national student sports games of the people's republic of china 2014 's republic of china
national student (youth) sports games of the people's republic of china 2023, guangxi national age merge with national student sports games of the people's republic of china and china national youth games.
national traditional games of ethnic minorities of the people's republic of china 1953 2023, hainan, haikou national
national youth olympics of cross country races of polish 1997
national youth olympics of indoor sports of polish 1995 2023, western pomerania national
national youth olympics of mental sports of polish 2012
national youth olympics of summer sports of polish 1995 2023, silesia national
national youth olympics of winter sports of polish 1996 2023, podkarpackie province national
nauru national games 2009
new zealand deaf games
new zealand games 1975
new zealand masters games 1989 2023, whanganui national age
new zealand university games 1902
new zealand winter games 2009 2024, and restrict winter events.
nigerian national sports festival 1973 2022, asaba national
nigerian university games 1966 2024, university of jos national school
nitro world games 2016 2021 (2022 hold), brisbane international
hot wheels nitro junior games 2019 2021, chino international age
nordic games 1901
north american indigenous games 1990 2023, halifax, nova scotia regional
north american outgames 2007 2016 - regional sexual orientation
north queensland games 1986 2024, cairns national intra-national games
summer olympic games 1896 2024, paris international
winter olympic games 1924 2026, milan, cortina d'ampezzo international
olympic virtual sports festival 2023, singapore international occupation military personnel
pacific games 1963 2023, honiara regional
pacific mini games 1981 2025, koror regional
pacific ocean games 1995 -sport event is between countries of the pacific rim,but only take place a edition.
pacific school games
palarong pambansa 1948 2022, metro manila, marikina national age sport events held annually for the elementary and high school students in the philippines
pan american games 1951 2023, santiago regional
pan american deaf youth games 2000
winter pan american games 1990 1990
pan american games for patients with asthma 2000
pan american games for the blind 1997
pan american games for the deaf 1975
pan american maccabi games 1967 2023, buenos aires regional religion
pan american martial arts games
pan american masters games 2016 2024, cleveland international age
pan american sports festival 2014 2014
pan american wheelchair games 1967
pan arab games 1953 2023, baghdad regional
pan arab games for the handicapped 1999.
pan-armenian summer games 1999 2023, gyumri international
pan-armenian winter games 2014
pan pacific masters games 1998 2022, queensland regional age
paralympic games 1960 2024, paris international disabled
paralympic winter games 1976 2026, milan, cortina d'ampezzo international disabled
parapan american games 1999 2023, santiago regional disabled
youth parapan american games 2005 2023, bogota regional disabled, age
pcu games 1999 2023, antwerp international age formerly known as world interuniversity games.
people's olympiad 1936 1936 - international political ideology protest against the 1936 summer olympics held in berlin under nazi rule.
philippine national games
philippine university games
punjab games 2004
qeltic games 2023, perth national sexual orientation
red sport international of summer 1921
red sport international of winter 1928
respublika universiade
reykjavik international games 2008 2023, reykjavik international
sarpcco games 1997
saudi games 2022 2022, riyadh national due to covid-19 pandemic postponed to 2022.
saussa games 1999
sell student games 1923 2023, tartu international age
sell student winter games 1929 1940
senior olympics 1987 2023, pittsburgh international age
senior winter olympics 2000 2011.
seven universities athletic meet 1962 2023, university of tokyo national age
sky games 2000.
south american games 1978 2026, rosario, santa fe regional
south american beach games 2009 2023, santa marta regional
south american deaf games 2014
south american masters games 2021 tba tba regional age
south american para games
south american university games 2004 2019.
south american youth games 2013 2025
south asian games 1984 2023, lahore regional
south asian beach games 2011
south asian winter games 2011
south australian masters games 1996 2023, copper coast national
south pacific games 1963 2007
south pacific masters games 2000
southeast asian games 1959 2023, phnom penh regional
summer spartakiad 1928.
winter spartakiad 1928.
summer spartakiad of the peoples of the ussr 1956 1991.
winter spartakiad of the peoples of the ussr 1962 1990.
special olympics national summer games in new zealand 1985 2022, hamilton regional disabled
special olympics national winter games in new zealand 2005 2023, tba regional disabled
special olympics usa 2006 2026, minnesota regional disabled
special olympics summer world games 1968 2023, berlin international disabled
special olympics winter world games 1977 2025, turin international disabled
asia pacific summer special olympic games 2013, utsunomiya international disabled
european summer special olympic games 1981, nyon, lausanne international disabled
special olympics pan african games 2020 2024, tba regional disabled
sportaccord world mind games 2011
somaliland regional games
south african games 1964
shanghai international games 1926
singapore university games
sri lanka university games 1980
state games of america (national congress of state games component games listed below) 1999 2024, san diego national
starty nadezhd 1975
sukma games 1986 2024, johor national
para sukma games 1982 2024, johor national
swedish games 1916
tafisa world martial arts festival 2019 2023
tafisa world sport for all games 1992 2024, nizhny novgorod regional focus on traditional sports and games(tsg).
tafisa european sport for all games 2018 2022, perugia regional
tailteann games 1924 1932
thailand national games 1967 2023, kanchanaburi national
thailand national youth games 1985 2023, nakhon sawan national age
thailand sports university games 1995 2023, ubon ratchathani university national school
the norway championships week of summer (nm week) 2018 2022, bergen, moss national
the norway championships week of winter (nm week) 2020 2022, skien national
asia pride games (the straits games) 2002 2023, phnom penh regional sexual orientation the name “ asia gay sports” was first coined in 2014.
the finnish championships week (sm-viikko) 2016 2023, lahti national
the swedish championships week of summer (sm week) 2009 2023, umeå national
the swedish championships week of winter (sm week) 2009 2023, skövde national
the world children's winners games
transplant games of america 2018 2022, san diego regional
tras-andean games (trasandina youth sports games), bolivia, chile and peru since 1998
trinidad and tobago beach games
trisome games
euro trisome games
tropic cup games 1962.
turkic international youth festivals
turkic universiade
tuvalu games 2008
u.s. olympic festival 1978
uk school games 2006 2022
unisport nationals 1992 2023, gold coast national age australia university games.
united world games 2005 2022.u12.u14.u16.u18 level.
usa masters games 2016 2022, lauderdale national age
usip world police games
vietnam national games 1985 2022, quang ninh province national
virtus americas regional games 2022 tba brazil, sao paulo regional disabled intellectual disability (inas)
virtus european games 2018 2024
virtus global games 2004 2023, vichy international disabled formerly known as inas global games.
for athletes with intellectual disability, autism or down syndrome.
virtus oceania asia games 2022, brisbane regional disabled for athletes with intellectual disability, autism or down syndrome.
west asian games 1997 2005
west asian para games 2017 2024, sharjah regional disabled
west african games 1977
west african university games
western canada summer games 1975 2023, manitoba national
western asiatic games 1934
women's islamic games 1993 2005
women's olympiad 1921
women's world games 1922 1934
world abilitysport games 2023, nakhon ratchasima international disabled
world air games 1997 2025
world artistic games[citation needed] international
world beach games 2019 2023, bali international
world bridge games 2008 2020 (2022 hold), salsomaggiore terme international
world combat games 2010 2023, riyadh international
world company sports games 2016 2023, león, guanajuato international
world cyber games 2000 2022
world dancesport games 2013
world deaf youth games
world dwarf games 1993 2023, cologne international disabled
world equestrian games 1990 2026.
world eskimo indian olympics 1961 2023, alaska, fairbanks international ethnicity
world e-sports games 2004
world ex-servicemen's wheelchair games 1993
world firefighters games 1990 2024, aalborg international occupation
world festival of youth and students 1947 2017
world games 1981 2025, chengdu international
world indigenous games 2015 2017
world lithuanians games 1978 1991, usually held in lithuania (athletes from lithuania itself debuted only in 3rd games in 1988).
world martial arts games 2007 2023, tba international
world masters games 1985 2025, taipei city, new taipei city international age
winter world masters games 2010 2024, lombardy international age
world medical and health games 1978 2023, madeira international occupation for health professional
world mind sports games 2008
world nature games 1997
world nomad games 2014 2024, astana international
world outgames 2006 2017
world police and fire games 1985 2023, winnipeg international occupation
world polonia games of summer 1934 2023
world polonia games of winter 2010 2022, wisła national
world roller games 2017 2022, buenos aires international
world scholar-athlete games 1993
world surfing games 1996 2023, surf city international
world transplant summer games 1978 2023, perth international
world transplant winter games 1994 2022, bormio international
world urban games 2019 2023
world youth games 1998
x games 1995 2022, south california international
winter x games 1997 2023, aspen international
summer x games asia 1998, chiba city regional
winter x games asia
summer x games europe 2013
winter x games europe 2010
x games latin america 2007
x games oceania 2018
youth centennial games 1996
summer youth olympic games 2010 2026, dakar international age
winter youth olympic games 2012 2024, gangwon international age
youth world games 2023 2023, algarve international age
zimbabwe national youth games 2003
zimbabwe national youth and paralympic games 2008, disability
legend
1. established – year in which first edition was held 2. year in which last edition is held 3. recurrence (in years) 4. location where next edition is held 5. cultural and/or political elements that limit audiences as intended (e.g. ethnicity, religion, gender, occupation)
this list is incomplete; you can help by adding missing items. (december 2021)
provincial multi-sport events in canada
bc games
alberta games
saskatchewan games
manitoba games
ontario games
jeux du quebec
east coast games of saint john's
provincial multi-sport events in argentina
juegos bonaerenses
juegos deportivos entrerrianos
provincial multi-sport events in chile
juegos juveniles del norte grande
alabama: alabama sports festival
arizona: grand canyon state games
california: california state games
colorado: rocky mountain state games
connecticut: nutmeg state games
florida: sunshine state games
georgia: georgia games
hawaii: aloha state games
idaho: winter games of idaho, summer games of idaho
illinois: prairie state games
indiana: state games of indiana
iowa: iowa games
kansas: sunflower state games
kentucky: bluegrass state games
maine: maine games
massachusetts: bay state games
minnesota: star of the north games
mississippi: state games of mississippi
missouri: show-me state games
montana: big sky state games
nebraska: cornhusker state games
new hampshire: new hampshire amateur state games
new jersey: garden state games
new mexico: new mexico games
new york: empire state games
north carolina: state games of north carolina
north dakota: prairie rose state games
oklahoma: sooner state games
oregon: state games of oregon
pennsylvania: keystone state games
texas: games of texas
utah: utah summer games, utah winter games
virginia: coventry commonwealth games of virginia
washington: washington state games
wisconsin: badger state games
wyoming: cowboy state games
state multi-sports events in malaysia
federal territories: federal territories games (swip)
johor: johor unity games
kedah: kedah darul aman games (sukda)
kelantan: kelantan games carnival (kasukel)
perak: perak games carnival (super)
sabah: sabah games (saga)
sarawak: sarawak games (suksar)
selangor: selangor games (sukses)
terengganu: terengganu games (sutera)
provincial multi-sport events in south korea
chungcheongbuk-do: chungcheongbuk-do sports festival, chungcheongbuk-do junior sports festival
chungcheongnam-do: chungcheongnam-do sports festival
gangwon-dl: gangwon-do sports festival
gyeongsangbuk-do: gyeongsangbuk-do sports festival, gyeongsangbuk-do students sports festival, gyeongsangbuk-do junior sports festival
gyeonggi-do: gyeonggi-do sports festival
gyeongsangnam-do: gyeongsangnam-do sports festival
jeollabuk-do: jeollabuk-do sports festival
jeollanam-do: ljeollanam-do sports festival
international athletics championships and games
world school championships
fisu world university championships
multi-sport event
multiple-stage competition (disambiguation)
african francophone games for the handicapped. topend sports.
history of the world martial arts games movement. wmagc.
agbu world games. topend sports.
agbu european games. topend sports.
agbu south american games. topend sports.
fear games will fade. alicespringsnews.
alps-adriatic youth games. topend sports.
arab school games. topend sports.
arab university games. topend sports.
arab university games for beach sports. topend sports.
armenian students sports games started. fisu ().
. jaif.
. icsd.
competition program for 1st asem youth games bangkok 2-8 june 2005. asem youth games.
j&k loses opportunity to host asian martial games 2018 due to security reasons. india.com.
kuwaiti transplant team to participate in world games in canada. kuna.
overview of 10th asia pacific youth games for 2019 held-in vladivostok, russia. affairscloud ().
во владивостоке стартовали юношеские игры стран азиатско-тихоокеанского региона. единая россия ().
looking back: falun gong practitioners participating in the 1998 asian sports festival (photos). minghui ().
new asian university games concept launched in kuala lumpur. inside the games ().
atatürk dam. open wiki.
discover the notice of race of the atlantic games 2022. atlanticgames.
region 5 youth games. auscregion5.
australasian police and emergency services games. apes2023.
everyone’s a winner at the australasian public sector games. trove.
get ready for frankston’s australia beach games 2018!. global swim series ().
2024 australian deaf games countdown. australian deaf games.
29 july  falls creek, victoria. australian police winter games.
20-21.08.2021 polsat plus arena gdansk. balticgames.
nul hosts 2019 boleswa intervasity games. 2019-boleswa-intervasity-games/.
cancellation of 2021 botswana games. bnsc.
launch of the westfield health british transplant games in leeds 2022. kidneycareuk ().
canoa quebrada será sede dos jogos universitários brasileiros de praia 2022. diariodonordeste ().
bsme games. bsme.
can-am 2022. windsor2022.
2024 canada deaf games. cdsa.
canterbury centennial games. trove.
uzbekistan to host inaugural central asian para games in september. insidethegames.
the 2nd chinese transplant games. 香港移植協會.
cook islands games 2020. thecoconet.
cook island sports and national olympic committee welcome interest in beach games. insidethegames ().
inaugural cook islands ta’okotai’anga university games postponed. cookislandsnews ().
people have always hated the olympics. time ().
summer corporate games 2021. corporate-games.
winter corporate games 2021. corporate-games.
costa rica celebrates its university games. fisu ().
cucsa games postponed. lestimes ().
"four medals for gb in 21st deaflympic games". england athletics. archived from the original o.
a history of the australian deaf games. blog.ai.
about the games. east african community.
12th edition of the eac military games underway in nairobi, kenya. east african community.
2019 east africa school games, feasssa, winners; full report. newsblaze.
8th east africa university games successfully held in tanzania. fisu ().
eastern european transplant games 1996. google ebooks.
russia to stage "esports games of the future" in 2023. insidethegames ().
european company sport games arnhem 2022. ecsgarnhem2022.
cancellation of european heart and lung transplant championships 2022 ostend (belgium). ehltf.
european maccabi games. maccabi.
welcome to the 3rd european martial arts games. worldmartialartsgames.
rotterdam will host the inaugural edition of the european para championships 2023. teamtoc.
. inside the games ().
european para youth games. epyg2022.
epyg winter 2020. europaralympic.
european police and fire games. policeandfire.games.
19  university of nottingham. esf.
the european transplant and dialysis games to take place in oxford in 2022, reuniting patients after almost two years of shielding. transplantsport.org.uk.
2nd european winter games are coming! see you all again 2023!. europeanwintergames.
extremity games adaptive sports for athletes with disabilities. disabled-world.
fisec’s objectives and mission. ffgames2020.
news archive. oceaniasport.
introduction brief history. oceaniasport.
about the games. exmouth.
“georgian universiade 2021” has started!. geomedi ().
gorge games spotlight hood river as a multisport mecca. seattletimes.
gorge games alive reincarnated event will run july 17-20. columbiagorgenews.
2005 gravity games h20. wakeboardingmag ().
iceland winter games 20-22 of march 2020 akureyri – north iceland. icelandwintergames.
uwa to host 2009 indian rim asian university games. uwa.
international university beach games. insidethegames.
asa games and leadership conference 2018. eusa.
asa winter games 2016. eusa.
issyk-kul region to host pearl of kyrgyzstan martial arts festival. 24.kg.
issyk-kul region to host international sports games. 24.kg ().
profile: history of the international law enforcement games. sportcal ().
international youth games almere 2022. international youth games ().
iran named as host of first-ever iwas winter games but no dates announced. insidethegames ().
brazil tries to surpass 60 medals at the south american school games in arequipa. gov.br ().
los xxviii juegos nacionales de docentes universitarios 2020 fortalecen la convivencia y la calidad educativa. unan ().
se inauguraron los juegos universitarios argentinos 2014. aptus.
first national para games 2021 under khelo india program. pmjandhanyojana.
korean national winter para sports festival. koreanpc.
sports in latin america and the caribbean. oxfordbibliographies ().
latin american transplant games 1998. google ebooks.
lithuanian national olympic games. facebook.
"archived copy" (pdf). archived from the original (pdf) o.
第二屆澳門全民運動會開幕. gov.mo.
the maccabi youth games are being hosted. maccabi.
manea games 2017. facebook.
masters indigenous games. iswo.
what are the med senior games. msgenova2022.
1st middle-east mediterranean scholar athlete games. sportcal ().
russia set to host 2023 international military sports council congress despite ukraine invasion. insidethegames ().
the south bank brain show, the independent, william hartson
nsc apologises for youth games blunders…as mtc reads the riot act. neweralive ().
community sports. pa.gov.sg.
on thursday, may 3, the launch of the 3rd edition of the national sports games was held. cud.org.uy.
about national deaf games. dsa.
中華民國111年全國身心障礙國民運動會-111全障運. 11sport.edunets.
fct picks 50 athletes for ilorin 2016 national youth games guardian.ng ().
110全國原住民族運動會 ilc.edu.
全國大專聽障生運動會　中央大學開打. ncu ().
national school games. myactivesg.
2009 national universiade in mongolia. fisu ().
第一届全国学生（青年）运动会2023年在广西举办. c中國日報 ().
2009 nauru national games. mygameday.
new zealand deaf games. deafgames.nz.
four americans win at new zealand meet. nytimes.
new zealand masters games. nzmg.
26th nuga games hold in march 2022. guardian.ng ().
the 2022 nq games will be hosted in townsville by the townsville city council from 29 april . nqgames.
ioc looks to singapore to host inaugural olympic virtual sports festival in early 2023. olympics.com ().
about psg. pacificschoolgames.
gallaudet to host 2006 pan american games for deaf youth. hearingreview ().
pan american games. books.google.
buenos aires to host 2023 pan american maccabi games. jpost ().
pan american martial arts games completed, results released. kaieteurnewsonline ().
arab games for the handicapped. topendsports.
2018 pan pacific masters games officially opened. mastersgames.com.au ().
inaugural edition of qeltic games to be hosted by the city of perth in 2023. liveactive.
11th national university games in azerbaijan in progress. fisu ().
namibia prepare for sarpcco games. economist ().
saudi games 2022 to welcome 6,000 athletes to riyadh in march. arabnews.
all set for saussa games. bmetro ().
south american games for the deaf. topendsports.
odesur anuncia la suspensión de los i jsm stgo 2021. stgomaster2021.
south australian masters games. sportsa.
the economic impact of participant sports events: a case study for the winter world masters games 2020 in tyrol, austria. mdpi.
national summer games 8-12 december 2022. nsg2021.specialolympics.
singapore university games (sunig). susc.
asia pride games 2022 亞洲同志運動會. pridegames.asia.
2022 transplant games. transplantgamesofamerica.
trinidad & tobago beach games 2018. specialolympics.
three turkic council international youth festivals were staged in ganja, bishkek and istanbul. turkkon.
first turkic council university sports games (turkic universiade) was staged in baku in april 2018. turkkon.
igniting the fire of friendship and uniting the world through sports – uwg vision statement. unitedworldgames.
usa masters games grand rapids, michigan june 24-27, 2021. usamastersgames.
world-police-games. internationalpolicesports.
2nd virtus european regional games. virtus.
2022 west asia para games. ibsasport.
international event 3rd world company sport games. athens2020.
world dancesport games 2013 kaohsiung. worlddancesport.
. icsd.
world dwarf games. internationaldwarfsportsfederation.
beverley's plea to medal thieves.lancashiretelegraph.
4th world lithuanian sports games – fdc lithuania 1991 – valdas adamkus. stampdigest.
klaipėdoje vyksta ix pasaulio lietuvių sporto žaidynės
important information. wmagc.
encyclopedia of international games. play.google.
11 sports, over 4000 athletes, hundreds of games… one multi-sport international tournament and festival!. youthworldgames.
zimbabwe national youth games (znyg). src.
revised zimbabwe national youth and paralympic games evaluated. src.
international olympic committee – olympic games, paralympic games, youth olympic games
organisation internationale de la francophonie – francophone games
olympic council of asia – asian games, asian youth games, asian beach games, asian indoor-martial arts games
commonwealth games federation – commonwealth games
international committee of mediterranean games – mediterranean games
international university sports federation – universiade
international island games association – island games
world transplant games – transplant games
multi-sport events
categories: multi-sport events-related listsmulti-sport events
bombing
toggle bombing subsection
victims
reaction
aftermath
toggle aftermath subsection
richard jewell falsely implicated
conviction of eric robert rudolph
centennial olympic park bombing
coordinates: 33°45′38″n 84°23′33″w
part of terrorism in the united states
olympicparkbombing shrapnelmark.jpg
bomb fragment mark on olympic park sculpture
location atlanta, georgia, united states
coordinates 33°45′38″n 84°23′33″w
date july 27, 1996
1:20 am (utc-4)
target centennial olympic park
attack type bombing
weapons pipe bomb
deaths 2 (including an indirect fatality)
injured 111
perpetrator eric rudolph
motive far-right extremism
the centennial olympic park bombing was a domestic terrorist pipe bombing attack on centennial olympic park in atlanta, georgia, on july 27, 1996, during the summer olympics. the blast directly killed one person and injured 111 others; another person later died of a heart attack. it was the first of four bombings committed by eric rudolph in a terrorism campaign against what he called "the ideals of global socialism" and against "abortion on demand". security guard richard jewell discovered the bomb before detonation, notified georgia bureau of investigation officers, and began clearing spectators out of the park along with other security guards.
after the bombing, jewell was initially investigated as a suspect by the federal bureau of investigation and news media aggressively focused on him as the presumed culprit when he was actually innocent. in october 1996, the fbi declared jewell was no longer a person of interest. following three more bombings i, rudolph was identified by the fbi as the suspect. in 2003, rudolph was finally captured and arrested, and in 2005 he agreed to plead guilty to avoid a potential death sentence. rudolph was sentenced to life imprisonment without parole for his crimes.
the grandstand at centennial olympic park
centennial olympic park was designed as the "town square" of the olympics, and thousands of spectators had gathered for a late concert by the band jack mack and the heart attack. sometime after midnight, rudolph planted a green u.s. military alice pack (field pack) containing three pipe bombs filled with smokeless powder surrounded by three-inch-long (7.6 cm) masonry nails, which caused most of the human injuries, underneath a bench near the base of a concert sound tower. he then left the area.
the pack had a directed charge and could have done more damage but it was slightly moved at some point. it used a steel plate as a directional device. investigators later tied the sandy springs and otherside lounge bombs together with this first device because all were propelled by nitroglycerin dynamite, used an alarm clock and rubbermaid containers, and contained steel plates.
1996 olympic games bombing location at base of the sound tower.
fbi agent david (woody) johnson received notice that a call to 911 was placed about 18 minutes before the bomb detonated warning that a bomb would go off at the park within 30 minutes by "a white male with an indistinguishable american accent".
security guard richard jewell discovered the bag underneath a bench and alerted georgia bureau of investigation officers. tom davis, of the georgia bureau of investigation, called in a bomb squad, including members of the atf and fbi to investigate the suspicious bag, which was leaning against the 40-ft nbc sound tower. jewell and other security guards began clearing the immediate area so that the bomb squad could investigate the suspicious package. the bomb detonated two to three minutes into the evacuation, before all spectators could leave the area. the first one who gave the news live worldwide was the italian reporter ezio luzzi, who was in atlanta as a correspondent of radiotelevisione italiana for the olympic games that were taking place at that time.
moreover, luzzi has remembered many times in his books and interview, what happened that day: "i was there, coordinating the rai expedition and the explosion happened while i was crossing the square. the blow threw me to the ground without injuring me. i got up thinking only of going back to the studio and telling the story: i arrived before cnn, before anyone else".[citation needed]
video of the explosion from a short distance away was captured by robert gee, a tourist from california, and later aired by cnn. the sound of the explosion was also recorded by a news crew from the german public television network ard, who were interviewing american swimmer janet evans at a nearby hotel.
alice hawthorne, 44, of albany, georgia, was killed in the explosion when a nail from the bomb penetrated her skull. a cameraman with turkish radio and television corporation, melih uzunyol, 40, who had "survived coverage of wars in azerbaijan, bosnia and the persian gulf," suffered a fatal heart attack while running to the scene. the bomb wounded 111 others.
as the park reopened following the bombing.
president bill clinton denounced the explosion as an "evil act of terror" and vowed to do everything possible to track down and punish those responsible.
despite the event, officials and athletes agreed that the games should continue as planned.
main article: richard jewell
though richard jewell was hailed as a hero for his role in discovering the bomb and moving spectators to safety, news organizations later reported that jewell was considered a potential suspect in the bombing, four days afterward, and shortly after a brief, mistaken detainment of two juvenile persons of interest at the kensington marta station. jewell, at the time, was unknown to authorities, and a lone wolf profile made sense to fbi investigators after they were contacted by his former employer at piedmont college.
jewell was named as a person of interest, although he was never arrested. jewell's home was searched, his background exhaustively investigated, and he became the subject of intense media interest and surveillance, including a media siege of his home.
after jewell was exonerated, he initiated defamation lawsuits against nbc news, the atlanta journal-constitution, and other media entities, and insisted on a formal apology from them. jewell's lawsuit accused piedmont college president raymond cleere of falsely describing jewell as a "badge-wearing zealot" who "would write epic police reports for minor infractions". the cases were later settled after 15 years of litigation with the georgia court of appeals decision in july 2012, that the newspapers accurately reported that jewell was the key suspect in the bombing, and emphasized he was only a suspect and the potential issues in the law enforcement case against him. richard jewell died on august 29, 2007, at the age of 44 from serious medical problems related to diabetes.
richard jewell, a biographical drama film, was released in the united states on december 13, 2019. the film was directed and produced by clint eastwood. it was written by billy ray, based on the 1997 article "american nightmare," and the book the suspect: an olympic bombing, the fbi, the media, and richard jewell, the man caught in the middle (2019) by kent alexander and kevin salwen. jewell is played by paul walter hauser.
a tv series, manhunt, also called manhunt: deadly games, dedicated season 2 (2020) to the story of richard jewell. jewell is played by cameron britton.
this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
find sources: "centennial olympic park bombing" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (july 2020) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
the bomber, eric rudolph, shown in a photo released by the fbi
main article: eric robert rudolph
after jewell was cleared, the fbi admitted it had no other suspects, and the investigation made little progress until early 1997, when two more bombings took place, at an abortion clinic and a lesbian nightclub, both in the atlanta area. similarities in the bomb design allowed investigators to conclude that this was the work of the same perpetrator. one more bombing of an abortion clinic, this time in birmingham, alabama, which killed a policeman working as a security guard and seriously injured nurse emily lyons, gave the fbi crucial clues including a partial license plate.
the plate and other clues led the fbi to identify eric robert rudolph, a carpenter and handyman, as a suspect. rudolph eluded capture and became a fugitive; officials believed he had disappeared into the rugged southern appalachian mountains, familiar from his youth. on may 5, 1998, the fbi named him as one of its ten most wanted fugitives and offered a $1 million reward for information leading directly to his arrest. on october 14, 1998, the department of justice formally named rudolph as its suspect in all four bombings.
after more than five years on the run, rudolph was arrested on may 31, 2003, in murphy, north carolina, by a rookie police officer, jeffrey scott postell of the murphy police department behind a save-a-lot store at about 4 a.m.; postell, on routine patrol, had originally suspected a burglary in progress. on april 8, 2005, the government announced rudolph would plead guilty to all four bombings, including the centennial olympic park attack. rudolph is serving four life terms without the possibility of parole at adx florence supermax prison in florence, colorado.
rudolph's justification for the bombings according to his april 13, 2005 statement, was political:
in the summer of 1996, the world converged upon atlanta for the olympic games. under the protection and auspices of the regime in washington, millions of people came to celebrate the ideals of global socialism. multinational corporations spent billions of dollars, and washington organized an army of security to protect these best of all games. even though the conception and purpose of the so-called olympic movement is to promote the values of global socialism, as perfectly expressed in the song "imagine" by john lennon, which was the theme of the 1996 games even though the purpose of the olympics is to promote these ideals, the purpose of the attack on july 27 was to confound, anger and embarrass the washington government in the eyes of the world for its abominable sanctioning of abortion on demand.
the plan was to force the cancellation of the games, or at least create a state of insecurity to empty the streets around the venues and thereby eat into the vast amounts of money invested.
on august 22, 2005, rudolph, who had previously received a life sentence for the alabama bombing, was sentenced to three concurrent terms of life imprisonment without parole for the georgia incidents. rudolph read a statement at his sentencing in which he apologized to the victims and families only of the centennial park bombing, reiterating that he was angry at the government and hoped the olympics would be canceled. at his sentencing, fourteen other victims or relatives gave statements, including the widower of alice hawthorne.
rudolph's former sister-in-law, deborah rudolph, talked about the irony of rudolph's plea deal putting him in custody of a government he hates. "knowing that he's living under government control for the rest of his life, i think that's worse to him than death," she told the san diego union tribune in 2005.
as reported in an april 8, 2013 alabama blog post, in february 2013, lulu.com published rudolph's book, between the lines of drift: the memoirs of a militant, and in april 2013 the u.s. attorney general seized his $200 royalty to help pay off the $1 million that rudolph owes in restitution to the state of alabama.
list of terrorist incidents, 1996
icon 1990s portal
munich massacre
domestic terrorism in the united states
boston marathon bombing, another bombing at an american sporting event
gross, doug (april 14, 2005). "eric rudolph lays out the arguments that fueled his two-year bomb attacks". san diego union-tribune. associated press. archived from the original on september 2, 2018. retrieved march 27, 2019.
"full text of eric rudolph's confession". npr (national public radio). april 14, 2005. retrieved december 6, 2013.
"20 years later, i still lose sleep over the centennial olympic park bombing. here's why". myajc. retrieved july 1, 2018.
brenner, marie (february 1997). "american nightmare: the ballad of richard jewell". vanity fair. retrieved december 6, 2013.
brown, aaron & harris, art (february 7, 2001). "the hunt for eric rudolph". cnn presents. cnn. retrieved december 6, 2013.
freeman, scott (august 24, 2006). "a hero in his own mind". orlando weekly. archived from the original on december 12, 2013. retrieved december 6, 2013.
"when terror struck the summer olympics 20 years ago". time. retrieved july 1, 2018.
"olympic park bombing brought terror close to home". politics.myajc. archived from the original on january 24, 2018. retrieved july 1, 2018.
shales, tom (july 26, 1996). "tv networks sprint into action". the washington post. p. a26. retrieved may 31, 2019.
"janet evans nearby during centennial park explosion". deseret news / associated press. july 27, 1996. retrieved august 12, 2016.
mackay, duncan. "janet evans to return to atlanta as part of 20th anniversary celebrations for 1996 olympics". inside the games. retrieved august 12, 2016.
"bomb at the olympics; heart ailment kills war survivor in altanta [sic]". the new york times. july 28, 1996. retrieved august 26, 2020.
jacobs, jeff (july 28, 1996). "in atlanta, fear roams hand in hand with anger". hartford courant. archived from the original on march 3, 2016.
"clinton pledges thorough effort to find olympic park bomber". cnn. july 27, 1996. retrieved december 6, 2013.
"ex-suspect in bombing sues newspapers, college: jewell's libel claim seeks unspecified damages". the washington post. january 29, 1997. archived from the original on october 20, 2012. retrieved december 6, 2013 – via highbeam research.
"ga. court upholds ruling in jewell suit". ajc. retrieved july 1, 2018.
sack, kevin (august 30, 2007). "richard jewell, 44, hero of atlanta attack, dies". the new york times. richard a. jewell, whose transformation from heroic security guard to olympic bombing suspect and back again came to symbolize the excesses of law enforcement and the news media, died wednesday at his home in woodbury, georgia. the cause of death was not released, pending the results of an autopsy that will be performed by the georgia bureau of investigation. but the coroner in meriwether county said that jewell died of natural causes and that he had battled serious medical problems since learning that he had diabetes in february.
ramos, dino-ray (october 8, 2019). "clint eastwood's 'richard jewell' to make world premiere at afi fest". deadline hollywood. retrieved october 9, 2019.
climek, chris. "review: 'richard jewell' clears one name while smearing another". npr. retrieved december 13, 2019.
brenner, marie (february 1997). "american nightmare: the ballad of richard jewell". retrieved december 6, 2019.
kent alexander and kevin salwen (2019). the suspect: an olympic bombing, the fbi, the media, and richard jewell, the man caught in the middle, abrams, isbn 1683355245.
"stop defending an irresponsible movie and start apologising | benjamin lee | film". the guardian. december 13, 2019. retrieved december 14, 2019.
marc tracy. "clint eastwood's 'richard jewell' is at the center of a media storm". the new york times. retrieved december 14, 2019.
"manhunt". imdb.
"atlanta olympic bombing suspect arrested". cnn. may 31, 2003.
faulk, kent (april 8, 2013). "birmingham abortion clinic bomber eric robert rudolph fights to get profits from his book". al.com.
fbi centennial park bombing page via the wayback machine, from december 2, 1998.
"fbi sets up toll-free information hot-line after atlanta blast."
history of atlanta
olympic games scandals and controversies
authority control: national edit this at wikidata
israelunited states
categories: 1996 summer olympics1996 murders in the united states1996 in georgia (u.s. state)1996 in atlantajul events in the united statesattacks in the united states in 1996crime in atlantacounterterrorism in the united statesreligiously motivated violence in the united stateschristian terrorism in the united statesimprovised explosive device bombings in the united statesfilmed improvised explosive device bombingsolympic deathsmurder in georgia (u.s. state)terrorist incidents in the united states in 1996crimes in georgia (u.s. state)bureau of alcohol, tobacco, firearms and explosives
results
referees
coaches and officials
israel at the 1972 summer olympics
extended-protected article
israel at the
1972 summer olympics
flag of israel.svg
ioc code isr
noc olympic committee of israel
website www.olympicsil.co.il (in hebrew and english)
in munich
competitor sports
flag bearer henry herscovici
medals
gold0silver0bronze0total0
summer olympics appearances (overview)
195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020
israel competed at the 1972 summer olympics in munich, west germany, which began on august 26. on septembe, in the munich massacre, 11 members of the israeli delegation—5 athletes, 2 referees, and 4 coaches (names bolded on this page)—were taken hostage by palestine liberation organization terrorists and murdered. the remainder of the team left munich on september 7.
shaul ladany, a holocaust survivor, competed in the 50-kilometer walk. he had been imprisoned in bergen-belsen concentration camp as a child, and wore a star of david on his warm-up jersey. when he was congratulated by locals on his fluent german, he responded: "i learned it in bergen-belsen". he survived the munich massacre by jumping off a balcony.
name sport event placing performance
shaul ladani athletics men's 50 km walk 19 4:24:38.6
(also entered for 20 km walk, but did not start)
esther shahamorov athletics women's 100 m semifinal (5th) 11.49
women's 100 m hurdles semifinal did not start (left munich before the semifinal)
dan alon fencing men's foil second round w5–l5 (1r 3-2, 2r 2-3)
yehuda weissenstein fencing men's foil second round w2–l8 (1r 2-3, 2r 0-5)
yair michaeli sailing flying dutchman 23 28-22-22-19-25-19-dns = 171 pts
(left kiel before 7th race)
itzhak nir
henry hershkowitz shooting 50 metre rifle prone 23 593/600
50 metre rifle three positions 46 1114/1200
zelig shtroch shooting 50 metre rifle prone 57 589/600
shlomit nir swimming women's 100 m breaststroke heats (8th) 1:20.90
women's 200 m breaststroke heats (6th) 2:53.60
david berger weightlifting light-heavyweight &lt;82.5 kg — j:132.5 c:122.5 s:— t:—
ze'ev friedman weightlifting bantamweight &lt;56 kg 12 j:102.5 c:102.5 s:125 t:330
yossef romano weightlifting middleweight &lt;75 kg — retired injured on third attempt to press 137.5 kg
gad tsobari wrestling freestyle — light flyweight &lt;48 kg group stage 0w–2l
eliezer halfin wrestling freestyle — lightweight &lt;68 kg group stage 1w–2l
mark slavin wrestling greco-roman — middleweight &lt;82 kg — did not start (taken hostage before his scheduled event)
the following nominated referees and judges were in the delegation:
yossef gutfreund — wrestling
yakov springer – weightlifting
the following coaches and officials were in the delegation:
shmuel lalkin — chef de mission
micha shamban — presumably deputy of chef de mission
eliyahu friedlender - sailing team manager
amitzur shapira — athletics coach
kehat shorr — shooting coach
tuvia sokolovsky — weightlifting coach
andre spitzer — fencing coach
moshe weinberg — wrestling coach
itzhac aldubi - chairman of asa (academic sport association)
werner nachmann
duel parrack
josef szwec
kurt weigl
israel archived  at the wayback machine
"shaul ladany bio, stats, and results | olympics at". sports-reference.com. archived from the original on february 7, 2013. retrieved february 24, 2013.
"ladany, shaul". jewsinsports.org. retrieved february 24, 2013.
"belsen survivor escapes death again". the miami news. september 6, 1972. archived from the original on march 9, 2020. retrieved february 24, 2013.
owen, john (july 24, 2008). "olympics flashback: 1972: terror and turmoil". seattlepi.com. retrieved february 25, 2013.
stan isaacs (2008). ten moments that shook the sports world: one sportswriter's eyewitness accounts of the most incredible sporting events of the past fifty years. skyhorse publishing inc. isbn 9781602396289. retrieved february 24, 2013.
official report, p.56
official report, p.65
official report, pp.247–250
official report, p.506
official report, p.229
official report, p.231
official report, p.344
official report, pp.166–7
official report, pp.164–5
official report, p.131
official report, p.135
official report, p.537
official report, p.534
binder, david (). "9 israelis on olympic team killed with 4 arab captors as police fight band that disrupted munich games". new york times.
israel at the olympics
israel at international sports competitions
olympic rings without rims.svg national olympic committees at the 1972 summer olympics in munich, west germany
stub icon
this article related to sport in israel is a stub. you can help wikipedia by expanding it.
this 1972 summer olympics-related article is a stub. you can help wikipedia by expanding it.
categories: nations at the 1972 summer olympicsisrael at the summer olympics by year1972 in israeli sportmunich massacreisraeli sport stubs1972 summer olympics stubs
gaisf council
function
membership
member federations
associate members
observers
list of gaisf presidents
current organizational structure
summits
notes and references
global association of international sports federations
gaisf.svg
abbreviation gaisf
formation 1967; 56 years ago
type sports organization
headquarters lausanne, switzerland
membership 97 full members and
20 associate members.
official language english, french
president ivo ferriani
website gaisf.sport
global association of international sports federations (gaisf) is the umbrella organisation for all (olympic and non-olympic) international sports federations as well as organisers of multi-sports games and sport-related international associations. it changed its name to sportaccord from march 2009 to april 2017 when it reverted to its former name. gaisf is an international sport organisation with 95 full members (international sports federations governing specific sports worldwide) and 20 associate members (organisations which conduct activities closely related to the international sports federations).
in november 2022 members of the global association of international sports federations (gaisf) voted for the dissolution of the organisation, with many of its activities taken by a restructured sportaccord. the revised governance structure of sport accord will see the association of ioc recognised international sports federations (arisf) and alliance of independent recognised members of sport (aims) join the association of summer olympic international federations (asoif) and the association of international olympic winter sports federations (aiowf) as members of sportaccord.
the council is composed of a president, two vice-presidents, a treasurer and five members.
designation name country sport federation
president mr. ivo ferriani italy international bobsleigh and skeleton federation
vice-president mr. stephan fox germany/ australia international federation of muaythai amateur
treasurer mr. riccardo fraccari italy world baseball softball confederation
council members mrs. marisol casado spain international triathlon union
ms. kate caithness scotland/ united kingdom world curling federation
dr. raffaele chiulli italy international powerboating federation
mr. nenad lalović serbia united world wrestling
mr. ingmar de vos belgium international equestrian federation
gaisf is the umbrella organisation for both olympic and non-olympic international sports federations, as well as organisers of international sporting events. in this role it provides expertise in, for example, anti-doping, integrity and social responsibility. by establishing multi-sports games that group together similar sports, gaisf aims to promote the members and the members' visibility.
member international federations can be either full or associate members of gaisf.
gaisf is deeply rooted in the sports movement. as early as 1921, international sports federations (ifs) expressed the need for a representative of their common objectives and interests. under the direction of paul rousseau, secretary general of the union cycliste internationale (uci), a permanent bureau of the ifs was established to facilitate dialogue with the olympic authorities.[citation needed]
in 1967, 26 international sports federations met in lausanne, agreed on the need to increase permanent liaisons, and adopted the name, “general assembly of international sports federations”. in order to establish a more formalised organisation, the “general association of international sports federations" (gaisf) was formed in 1976, and the headquarters were moved to monaco two years later.
the new millennium brought important changes to the organisation. reacting to the increasing pressure on ifs to professionalise and develop, gaisf, in collaboration with the associations of summer and winter olympic international federations (asoif and aiowf), launched the first sportaccord international convention in 2003. this new format “by sport for sport” allowed ifs and sports business to get together, share knowledge and network.
in march 2009, gaisf was rebranded sportaccord and, in the same year, its offices moved from monaco to lausanne, the olympic capital.
in april 2017, following the former president marius vizer's controversial attack against ioc president thomas bach during the opening sportaccord's 2015 convention in sochi and his subsequent resignation, the organisation rebranded back to gaisf under its new president patrick baumann.
in may 2019, raffaele chiulli was unanimously elected as gaisf president in gold coast, australia
1920s
as early as 1921, under the direction of paul rousseau, secretary general of the “union cycliste internationale”, a permanent bureau of the international sports federations (ifs) was created. with regular ifs/ioc meetings taking place, dialogue with the olympic authorities became easier. however, organisations that were not part of the olympic movement were excluded.
1960s
in the 1960s, the sports movement evolved rapidly. roger coulon, president of the “fédération internationale de lutte amateur”, was the first to express the need for a wider recognition of the role of ifs. for non-olympic federations, a forum that would enable them to better express their points of view was necessary. the creation of a stable organisation ensuring permanent relations between ifs appeared to be the logical continuation of their meetings, which had taken place frequently but without rules or a fixed organisation. the common preparation of these meetings with the ioc could thus be better supported. it also permitted a constant liaison between the ifs and the general population. in 1966, the time seemed appropriate, and the conversion to the newly constituted assembly was launched.
on 21–23 april 1967, delegates from the following 26 international sports federations met in lausanne in the hotel continental: aeronautics, rowing, basketball, bobsleigh, boules, canoeing, cycling, equestrian, fencing, gymnastics, handball, hockey, ice hockey, judo, luge, wrestling, motorcycling, swimming, modern pentathlon, roller skating, skiing, shooting, volleyball, weightlifting, university sport, and maccabi.
the delegates agreed on the necessity to establish permanent liaisons between the ifs for the defence of their objectives and common goals, the preservation of their autonomy, and constant exchange of information. the name “general assembly of international sports federations” was adopted.
in 1976, this name was replaced by “general association of international sports federations” (gaisf). in 1978, the office moved from lausanne to monaco. gaisf represented the extension of the past meetings of the ifs, dealing not only with olympic matters, but also with all questions of common interest for the ifs.
2000s
in 2003, in collaboration with asoif and aiowf, gaisf launched the first sportaccord convention to answer a need of the ifs, which were looking for a “one-stop shop” where they could hold their annual meetings, be encouraged to network and share their knowledge.
in march 2009, gaisf was rebranded sportaccord at the meeting of the 7th sportaccord international convention in denver. in april 2009, it moved its main office from monaco to maison du sport international in lausanne, switzerland.
o, the last of eight days of the annual general assembly of sportaccord in quebec city, the federation of international lacrosse and the international mind sports association were accepted, bringing the number of sportaccord members to 107.
o, the last of eight days of the annual general assembly of sportaccord in saint petersburg, the international cheer union and the federation internationale de l'automobile were voted into sportaccord.
o, at sportaccord's 2015 convention in sochi, sportaccord president marius vizer made a speech that was sharply critical of the ioc and its president, thomas bach. following the speech, the iaaf (now known as world athletics), the issf, and world archery withdrew from sportaccord in protest, and there were a number of further withdrawals in may 2015, including the international rowing federation.
at the 2017 convention in aarhus, federation internationale du sport universitaire (fisu) and federation of international bandy (fib) became full members and sportaccord was renamed gaisf.
by the end of 2018, the world armwrestling federation (waf) was the new addition to the gaisf full member list along with 4 associate members – world olympics association, international sports press association, world union of olympic cities and world federation of the sporting goods industry
# sport logo organisation acronym founded membership
asoif aiowf arisf aims
1 aikido aikido pictogram.svg international aikido federation iaf •
2 air sports paragliding pictogram.svg hang gliding pictogram.svg aerobatics pictogram.svg gliding pictogram.svg ballooning pictogram.svg aeromodeling pictogram.svg skydiving pictogram.svg parachuting pictogram.svg paragliding xc pictogram.svg paramotoring pictogram.svg paragliding synchro aerobatics pictogram.svg paragliding accuracy pictogram.svg paragliding solo aerobatics pictogram.svg fédération aéronautique internationale fai •
3 american football american football pictogram.svg international federation of american football ifaf •
4 aquatics diving pictogram.svg open water swimming pictogram.svg swimming pictogram.svg synchronized swimming pictogram.svg water polo pictogram.svg high diving pictogram.svg beach water polo pictogram.svg short course swimming pictogram.svg world aquatics fina 1908 •
5 archery archery pictogram.svg archery (field) pictogram.svg archery (flight and clout) pictogram.svg archery ski pictogram.svg indoor archery pictogram.svg archery (compound) pictogram.svg kyuodo archery pictogram.svg world archery federation wa 1931 •
6 armwrestling armwrestling pictogram.svg world armwrestling federation waf •
7 athletics athletics pictogram.svg athletics (middle-long distance running) pictogram.svg athletics (relay running) pictogram.svg athletics (hurdles running) pictogram.svg athletics (steeplechase running) pictogram.svg athletics (long jump) pictogram.svg athletics (triple jump) pictogram.svg athletics (high jump) pictogram.svg athletics (pole vault) pictogram.svg athletics (javelin) pictogram.svg athletics (shot put) pictogram.svg athletics (discus throw) pictogram.svg athletics (hammer throw) pictogram.svg indoor athletics pictogram.svg beach athletics pictogram.svg world athletics iaaf 1912 •
8 automobile racing f1 pictogram.svg motor sport (automobile modern) pictogram.svg karting pictogram.svg fédération internationale de l'automobile fia •
9 badminton badminton pictogram.svg badminton world federation bwf 1934 •
10 bandy bandy pictogram.svg federation of international bandy fib •
11 baseball and softball baseball pictogram.svg softball pictogram.svg baseball5 pictogram.svg pesäpallo pictogram.svg world baseball softball confederation wbsc •
12 basketball 3x3 basketball pictogram.svg basketball pictogram.svg federation internationale de basketball fiba 1932 •
13 basque pelota basque pelota pictogram.svg federación internacional de pelota vasca fipv •
14 biathlon biathlon pictogram.svg international biathlon union ibu •
15 billiard sports cue sports pictogram.svg billiards pictogram.svg world confederation of billiards sports wcbs •
16 bobsleigh bobsleigh pictogram.svg skeleton pictogram.svg international bobsleigh and skeleton federation ibsf •
17 bodybuilding bodybuilding pictogram.svg international federation of bodybuilding & fitness ifbb •
18 boules boules sports pictogram.svg petanque pictogram.svg bocce pictogram.svg confédération mondiale des sports de boules cmsb •
19 bowling bowling pictogram.svg lawn bowls pictogram.svg bowling (ten pins) pictogram.svg international bowling federation ibf •
20 boxing boxing pictogram.svg shoot boxe pictogram.svg international boxing association iba 1946 •
21 bridge contract bridge pictogram.svg world bridge federation wbf •
22 canoeing canoeing (flatwater) pictogram.svg canoeing (slalom) pictogram.svg kayak polo pictogram.svg canoe polo pictogram.svg vaa pictogram.svg international canoe federation icf 1946 •
23 casting casting pictogram.svg international casting sport federation icsf •
24 cheer cheerleading pictogram.svg international cheer union icu •
25 chess pictogram of person playing chess international chess federation fide •
26 climbing & mountaineering mountaineering pictogram (2).svg mountain running pictogram.svg union internationale des associations d'alpinisme uiaa •
27 cricket cricket pictogram.svg international cricket council icc •
28 curling curling pictogram.svg world curling federation wcf •
29 cycle sport cycling (bmx freestyle) pictogram.svg cycling (bmx) pictogram.svg cycling (mountain biking) pictogram.svg cycling (road) pictogram.svg cycling (track) pictogram.svg cycling artistic pictogram.svg cycling ball pictogram.svg indoor cycling pictogram.svg footbike pictogram.svg cycling polo pictogram.svg union cycliste internationale uci 1900 •
30 dancesport dancesport pictogram.svg breakdancing pictogram.svg dancesport pictogram.svg world dancesport federation wdsf 1957 associate member •
31 darts darts pictogram.svg world darts federation wdf •
32 dragon boat dragon boat pictogram.svg international dragon boat federation idbf •
33 draughts draughts pictogram.svg fédération mondiale du jeu de dames fmjd •
34 equestrian sports equestrian dressage pictogram.svg equestrian driving pictogram.svg equestrian eventing pictogram.svg equestrian jumping pictogram.svg eq vaulting pictogram.svg equestrian western pictogram.svg tent pegging pictogram.svg fédération équestre internationale fei 1921 •
35 fencing fencing pictogram.svg fédération internationale d'escrime fie 1913 •
36 fistball fistball pictogram.svg international fistball association ifa •
37 floorball floorball pictogram.svg international floorball federation iff •
38 flying disc ultimate pictogram.svg frisbee pictogram.png world flying disc federation wfdf •
39 football football pictogram.svg futsal pictogram.svg beach soccer pictogram.svg minifootball pictogram.svg fédération internationale de football association fifa 1904 •
40 go go (game) pictogram.svg international go federation igf •
41 golf golf pictogram.svg international golf federation igf 1958 •
42 gymnastics gymnastics (artistic) pictogram.svggymnastics (rhythmic) pictogram.svg gymnastics (trampoline) pictogram.svg gymnastics (aerobic) pictogram.svg gymnastics (acrobatic) pictogram.svg parkour pictogram.svg gymnastics (artistic - vault) pictogram.svg gymnastics (artistic - floor) pictogram.svg gymnastics (artistic - parallel bars) pictogram.svg gymnastics (artistic - pommel horse) pictogram.svg gymnastics (artistic - uneven bars) pictogram.svg gym wheel pictogram.svg gymnastics (artistic - balance beam) pictogram.svg gymnastics (aerobic) pictogram.svg gymnastics (artistic - horizontal bar) pictogram.svg gymnastics (ling) pictogram.svg gymnastics (artistic - rings) pictogram.svg federation internationale de gymnastique fig 1881 •
43 handball handball pictogram.svg beach handball pictogram.svg international handball federation ihf 1946 •
44 field hockey field hockey pictogram.svg indoor hockey pictogram.svg unihockey pictogram.svg international hockey federation fih 1924 •
45 ice hockey ice hockey pictogram.svg international ice hockey federation iihf •
46 ice stock sport ice stock sport pictogram.svg international federation icestocksport ifi •
47 judo judo pictogram.svg international judo federation ijf 1951 •
48 ju-jitsu jujitsu pictogram.svg ju-jitsu international federation jjif •
49 karate karate pictogram.svg karate kumite pictogram.svg world karate federation wkf •
50 kendo kendo pictogram.svg international kendo federation fik •
51 kickboxing kickboxing pictogram.svg world association of kickboxing organisations wako •
52 korfball korfball pictogram.svg international korfball federation ikf •
53 lacrosse lacrosse pictogram.svg world lacrosse wl •
54 lifesaving lifesaving pictogram.svg international life saving federation ils •
55 luge luge pictogram.svg fédération internationale de luge de course fil •
56 minigolf minigolf pictogram.svg world minigolf sport federation wmf •
57 modern pentathlon modern pentathlon pictogram.svg winter pentathlon (all stages) pictogram.svg union internationale de pentathlon moderne uipm 1912 •
58 motorcycle racing motor cycle pictogram.svg motor cycle (speedway) pictogram.svg motocross pictogram.svg motor cycle (trial) pictogram.svg freestyle motocross pictogram.svg motor cycle (motocross) pictogram.svg fédération internationale de motocyclisme fim •
59 muaythai muay thai pictogram.svg international federation of muaythai amateur ifma •
60 netball netball pictogram.svg international federation of netball associations ifna •
61 orienteering orienteering pictogram.svg ski-orienteering pictogram.svg international orienteering federation iof •
62 polo polo pictogram.svg federation of international polo fip •
63 powerboating motor sport (boat) pictogram.svg jet ski pictogram.svg water motorsports pictogram.svg union internationale motonautique uim •
64 powerlifting powerlifting (three lifts) pictogram.svg international powerlifting federation ipf •
65 practical shooting shooting pictogram.svg shooting pictogram (gun).svg international practical shooting confederation ipsc •
66 racquetball racquets pictogram.svg international racquetball federation irf •
67 roller sports inline speed skating pictogram.svg skateboarding pictogram.svg artistic roller skating pictogram.svg inline hockey pictogram.svg roller hockey pictogram.svg inline extreme skating pictogram.svg world skate firs 1924 associate member •
68 rowing rowing pictogram.svg indoor rowing pictogram.svg coastal rowing pictogram.svg reverse rowing pictogram.svg world rowing fisa 1892 •
69 rugby union rugby sevens pictogram.svg rugby union pictogram.svg world rugby wr 1886 •
70 sailing sailing pictogram.svg windsurfing pictogram.svg ice sailing pictogram.svg world sailing ws 1907 •
71 sambo sambo pictogram.svg beach sambo pictogram.svg fédération internationale de sambo fias •
72 savate savate pictogram.svg federation internationale de savate fisav •
73 sepaktakraw sepaktakraw pictogram.svg beach sepaktakraw pictogram.svg international sepaktakraw federation istaf •
74 shooting sport shooting pictogram.svg shooting pictogram (gun).svg crossbow armbrust shooting pictogram.svg international shooting sport federation issf 1907 •
75 skating figure skating pictogram.svg speed skating pictogram.svg short track speed skating pictogram.svg international skating union isu •
76 skiing cross country skiing pictogram.svg alpine skiing pictogram.svg ski jumping pictogram.svg nordic combined pictogram.svg freestyle skiing pictogram.svg snowboarding pictogram.svg ski ballet pictogram.svg speed skiing pictogram.svg skijoring pictogram.svg grass skiing pictogram.svg skibob pictogram.svg fédération internationale de ski fis •
77 ski mountaineering ski mountaineering pictogram.svg international ski mountaineering federation ismf •
78 sleddog sled dog racing pictogram.svg international federation of sleddog sports ifss •
79 soft tennis soft tennis pictogram.svg international soft tennis federation istf •
80 sport climbing climbing pictogram.svg climbing ice pictogram.svg international federation of sport climbing ifsc 2007 associate member •
81 sports fishing angling pictogram.svg confédération internationale de la pêche sportive cips •
82 squash squash pictogram.svg world squash federation wsf •
83 sumo sumo pictogram.svg international sumo federation ifs •
84 surfing surfing pictogram.svg international surfing association isasurf 1964 associate member •
85 table tennis table tennis pictogram.svg international table tennis federation ittf 1926 •
86 taekwondo taekwondo pictogram.svg world taekwondo wt 1973 •
87 tennis tennis pictogram.svg indoor tennis pictogram.svg international tennis federation itf 1913 •
88 teqball
teqball pictogram.svg
international federation of teqball fiteq •
89 triathlon triathlon pictogram.svg duathlon (all stages) pictogram.svg international triathlon union itu 1989 •
90 tug of war tug of war pictogram.svg tug of war international federation twif •
91 underwater sports finswimming pictogram.svg underwater hockey pictogram.svg scuba diving pictogram.svg freediving pictogram.svg spearfishing pictogram.svg confédération mondiale des activités subaquatiques cmas •
92 university sports
silver fisu.svg
fédération internationale du sport universitaire fisu •
93 volleyball volleyball (beach) pictogram.svg volleyball (indoor) pictogram.svg fédération internationale de volleyball fivb 1947 •
94 waterskiing water skiing pictogram.svg wakeboarding pictogram.svg kiteboarding pictogram.svg international waterski & wakeboard federation iwwf •
95 weightlifting weightlifting pictogram.svg international weightlifting federation iwf 1905 •
96 wrestling wrestling pictogram.svgwrestling freestyle pictogram.svg glima wrestling pictogram.svg beach wrestling pictogram.svg pahlavani wrestling pictogram.svg belt wrestling pictogram.svg united world wrestling uww 1912 •
97 wushu wushu pictogram.svg international wushu federation iwuf •
28+4 7 42 20
association of paralympic sports organisations (apso)
commonwealth games: commonwealth games federation (cgf)
masters games: international masters games association (imga)
mediterranean games: international committee of mediterranean games (icmg or cijm)
military world games: conseil international du sport militaire (cism)
world mind sports games: international mind sports association (imsa)
world transplant games federation (wtgf)
paralympic games: international paralympic committee (ipc)
school sports: international school sport federation (isf)
special olympics: special olympics (soi)
sports for the deaf: international committee of sports for the deaf (ciss)
the world games: international world games association (iwga)
csit world sports games: international workers and amateurs in sports confederation (csit)
other
european broadcasting: european broadcasting union (ebu / uer)
panathlon: panathlon international (pi)
world olympians association (woa)
sports chiropractic: federation internationale de chiropratique du sport (fics)
sports facilities: international association for sports and leisure facilities (iaks)
sports medicine: international federation of sports medicine (fims)
sports journalism: international sports press association (aips)
olympic cities: world union of olympic cities
sporting goods industry: world federation of the sporting goods industry (wfsgi)
the gaisf observer status can be requested by the applicants to gaisf membership interested to obtain support and guidance in their path to fulfil the gaisf membership criteria.
sport organisation acronym
dodgeball world dodgeball association wda
footgolf federation for international footgolf fifg
jump rope international jump rope union ijru
kettlebell lifting international union of kettlebell lifting iukl
obstacle racing world obstacle fiso
padel international padel federation ipf
poker international federation of match poker ifp
pole dance international pole sports federation ipsf
rafting international rafting federation irf
rugby league rugby league international federation irl
table football/soccer international table soccer federation itsf
president member of duration
william berge phillips fina 1967–1969
thomas keller fisa 1969–1986
un yong kim wtf 1986–2004
hein verbruggen uci 2004–2013
marius vizer ijf 2013–2015
gian-franco kasper fis 2015–2016
patrick baumann fiba 2016–2018
raffaele chiulli uim 2018–2021
ivo ferriani ibsf 2021–
president vice president interim manager
ivo ferriani stephan fox nis hatt
originally launched in 2003, sportaccord world sport & business summit is a gathering of more than 1,500 leading representatives from the sports industry. sportaccord is focused on driving positive change internationally and dedicated to engaging and connecting; international federations, rights holders, organising committees, cities, press and media, businesses and other organisations involved in the development of sport.
sportaccord is a not-for-profit organisation which annually brings together representatives from more than 100 international sports federations affiliated with the following umbrella organisations that host their annual general assemblies at sportaccord. our event is an international sport convention hosted over a week, combining an exhibition area, a themed conference programme and a multitude of networking events.
sportaccord’s stakeholders include: asoif (association of summer olympic international federations), aiowf (association of international olympic winter sports federations), arisf (association of ioc recognised international sports federations), aims (alliance of independent recognised members of sport), gaisf (global association of international sports federations) and associate members. in addition, sportaccord receives the full support of the ioc (international olympic committee).
saic dates host city
18th tba tba
note 1: the 2020 sportaccord world sport & business summit in beijing was cancelled, due to the covid-19 pandemic.
note 2: the 18th sportaccord world sport & business summit was postponed from november 2021 to may 2022.
note 3: sportaccord summit in yekaterinburg cancelled following russian invasion of ukraine.
international olympic committee (ioc)
association of summer olympic international federations (asoif)
association of international olympic winter sports federations (aiowf)
association of ioc recognised international sports federations (arisf)
international world games association (iwga)
list of international sport federations
world combat games
sportaccord world mind games
"members" sportaccord – international federations' union (sportaccord.com).
btcom. "gaisf » mission and vision".
btcom. "gaisf » members approve dissolution of gaisf at extraordinary general assembly".
btcom. "gaisf » dissolution of gaisf approved at extraordinary general assembly, record attendance of members, next steps clarified".
btcom. "gaisf » ivo ferriani: the global sports community has secured its future for 2023 and beyond".
"mission and vision".
"associate membership". gaisf.
"welcome to the new gaisf website". gaisf.
"history of sportaccord". sportaccord.
"federation of international lacrosse and international mind sports association are new sportaccord members". sportaccord.
"international cheer union and federation internationale de l'automobile are new sportaccord members". sportaccord. archived from the original o.
livingstone, robert (20 april 2015). "sportaccord counts its losses after chief's attack on olympics backfires". gamesbids.com.
"world rowing resigns from sportaccord". insidethegames.
sportaccord changes name to global association of international sports federations
"members". asoif.
"asoif statutes" (pdf). p. 12.
"members - arisf association of ioc recognised international sport federation". www.arisf.sport.
the iaaf, issf and world archery federation withdrew from sportaccord o.
"what is sportaccord? - sportaccord".
"lausanne to host 2004 sportaccord convention" (pdf). sportaccord. archived from the original (pdf) o.
"the world meets in seoul" (pdf). around the rings. april 2006. archived from the original (pdf) o.
"countdown to beijing" (pdf). around the rings. april 2007. archived from the original (pdf) o.
"athens hosted the most successful edition of sportaccord". athens convention bureau (english). archived from the original o.
"sportaccord 2008 tightens focus on cities". sport business. archived from the original o.
"athens hosts sixth edition of sportaccord" (pdf). around the rings. june 2008. archived from the original (pdf) o.
"sportaccord 2009 kicks off in denver". around the rings.
"denver global program (in.pdf)" (pdf). sportaccord. archived from the original (pdf) o.
"denver is first north american city to host sportaccord conference". metro denver. archived from the original o.
"around the rings special edition – sportaccord denver" (pdf). around the rings. march 2009. archived from the original (pdf) o.
"dubai global program (in.pdf)" (pdf). sportaccord. archived from the original (pdf) o.
"dubai to host sportaccord in 2010". sport business. archived from the original o.
"around the rings special edition – dubai" (pdf). around the rings. april 2010. archived from the original (pdf) o.
"registration opens for 2011 sportaccord convention in london". london.gov.uk. archived from the original o.
"london to host sportaccord convention". london press service. archived from the original o.
"around the rings sportaccord special edition" (pdf). around the rings. april 2011. archived from the original (pdf) o.
"sportaccord convention selects iconic quebec hotel". around the rings.
"sportaccord convention 2012 awarded to québec city". canadian sport tourism alliance.
"the atr sportaccord 2012 special edition". around the rings.
"saint petersburg to host 2013 sportaccord convention".
around the rings special edition about 2013 sportaccord convention archive at the wayback machine
"sportaccord convention 2013 draws record attendance".
"conferences convention – sportaccord 2014 to turkey".
"dates for 2015 sportaccord international convention in sochi announced".
"sochi to host 2015 sportaccord international convention".
"where sports meet".
"sportaccord convention 2017 awarded to aarhus in denmark".
"bangkok awarded 2018 sportaccord convention".
"gold coast to host 2019 sportaccord summit".
"sportaccord 2020 cancellation statement". around the rings.
"sportaccord world sport & business summit in ekaterinburg rescheduled for may 2022". gaisf.
"sportaccord summit in yekaterinburg cancelled following russian invasion of ukraine". inside the games.
home page
official web site of sportaccord
international sports federations
authority control edit this at wikidata
categories: sports organizations established in 1967international olympic committeeioc-recognised international federationssupraorganizationsorganisations based in lausanneinternational sports organisations based in switzerland
recipients
pierre de coubertin medal
awarded for institutions with a pedagogical and educational role and to people who, through their research and the creation of intellectual works in the spirit of pierre de coubertin, contribute to the promotion of olympism.
presented by international olympic committee (ioc)
first awarded 1997
website http://www.olympic.org/
the pierre de coubertin medal is a special decoration awarded by the international olympic committee that "pays tribute to institutions with a pedagogical and educational role and to people who, through their research and the creation of intellectual works in the spirit of pierre de coubertin, contribute to the promotion of olympism." it was designed by andré ricard sala, with one face featuring a portrait of coubertin and the other showing the olympic motto and rings.
the medal is not the same award as the pierre de coubertin world trophy, which was inaugurated in 1964 and is awarded by the international fair play committee, although the two are sometimes confused. for example, some news media reported o that nikki hamblin and abbey d'agostino had received the medal after colliding with each other on the track during the 5000m event and assisting each other to continue the race. the new zealand olympic committee said that no such award had yet been made, and the guardian later corrected their report confirming "the award was the international fair play committee award rather than the pierre de coubertin award".
recipient country accomplishment(s) date place
juan antonio samaranch spain seventh president of the international olympic committee 1997 —
leon štukelj slovenia
(awarded posthumously) —
raymond gafner switzerland — 1999 —
rainier iii, prince of monaco monaco — 2000 —
joão havelange brazil — 2000 —
gianni agnelli italy — 2000 —
alain danet france — 2000 —
kurt furgler switzerland — 2000 —
henry kissinger united states — 2000 —
yoshiaki tsutsumi japan — 2000 —
emil zátopek czechoslovakia 1952 summer olympic
(awarded posthumously) helsinki, finland
kéba mbaye senegal — 2001 —
rodolphe leising switzerland — 2001 —
wolf lyberg sweden — 2001 —
spencer eccles united states 2002 winter olympics february 2002 salt lake city, utah, united states
artur takac switzerland — 2002 —
conrado durantez spain — 2002 —
hilda múdra slovakia — 2002 —
carlos luña longo guatemala — 2002 —
walburga grimm germany — 2003 —
cecilia tait peru — 2003 —
marino ercolani casadei san marino — 2003 —
julio ernesto cassanello argentina — 2003 —
vanderlei de lima brazil in recognition of his exceptional demonstration of fair play and olympic values during the 2004 summer olympic athens, greece
erwin niedermann austria — 2004 —
heiner heinze germany — 2004 —
martin franken netherlands in recognition of his contribution to the promotion of the olympic movement and services to the io lausanne, switzerland
elena novikova-belova belarus 2007 xi international scientific congres minsk, belarus
shaul ladany israel "unusual outstanding sports achievements during a span covering over four decades minsk, belarus
manfred bergman israel for services rendered to the international olympic committee and the olympic cause december, 2008
lausanne, switzerland
boyan radev bulgaria  —
eric monnin france olympic education specialist 2012 —
bob nadin canada ice hockey referee 2012 —
richard garneau canada 2014 winter olympic
(awarded posthumously) sochi, russia
michael hwang singapore "exceptional services to the olympic movement singapore
petros synadinos flag of greece.svggreece long and diverse service to the olympic movement 2016 athens, greece
eduard von falz-fein liechtenstein "[l]ong service to the olympic movement vaduz, liechtenstein
lü junjie china zisha artis lausanne, switzerland
han meilin china designer of the fuwa, mascots of the 2008 summer olympics lausanne, switzerland
aldons vrublevskis latvia former president of the latvian no sigulda, latvia
george hirthler united states author of 'the idealist' about pierre de couberti lausanne, switzerland
rolf lukaschewski germany german-born contemporary artis lausanne, switzerland
olympic cup
olympic order
106th ioc session meeting minutes, lausanne: international olympic committee, 3–6 september 1997, p. 68
"angel or demon? the choice of fair play". international olympic committee. 2006. archived from the original o.
"world fair play trophy". international fair play committee. 2015.
"new zealand and us runners awarded for sportsmanship". the guardian.
"rio olympics: kiwi runner nikki hamblin in line for rare pierre de coubertin honour". stuff.
olympic review. international olympic committee. xxvi (17): 9. october–november 1997. {{cite journal}}: missing or empty |title= (help)
"leon stukelj awarded ioc medal posthumously". international olympic committee.
"lima vanderlei receives the pierre de coubertin medal". international olympic committee.
"sports shorts – israel news". haaretz.
"san marino noc president awarded the olympic order". chinese olympic committee. archived from the original o.
"singapore lawyer michael hwang receives the pierre de coubertin medal for his services to the olympic movement - singapore national olympic council".
"πέτρος συναδινός". ελληνική ολυμπιακή επιτροπή (in greek).
vasileiou, konstantinos (). "the 'pierre de coubertin' award to petros synadinos!". paralympicus.gr.
"ioc president visits liechtenstein". international olympic committee.
"ioc awards pierre de coubertin medal to chinese artist lv junjie - xinhua - english.news.cn". www.xinhuanet.com. archived from the original on january 16, 2018.
"chinese artist awarded coubertin medal at ioc headquarters in lansanne". xinhua. archived from the original on april 25, 2018.
"olympic highlights 07/12/2020 - olympic news". olympics.com.
sheidlower, noah. "atlanta resident george hirthler receives rare pierre de coubertin medal from international olympic committee". the atlanta journal-constitution.
"pierre de coubertin medal awarded to artist rolf lukaschewski and olympic writer george hirthler". international olympic committee. .
categories: olympic medalsrecipients of the pierre de coubertin medalawards established in 1997olympic symbols
olympic day run
olympic day run is an international olympic movement activity promoting mass participation of sports held in june organized by national olympic committees (nocs).
the international olympic committee (ioc) was formally established o through the efforts of pierre de coubertin promoting competitive sport as a revival of the ancient olympic games.
due to world war ii, olympic games had not been held in eithe. the city of london rose to host to the games of the xiv after world war ii. in january 1948, the international olympic committee (ioc) approved the idea of olympic day to commemorate the creation of the ioc o in paris, a sort of “ birthday ” of the olympic movement at the 42nd ioc session in st moritz, switzerland. olympic day was held for the first time on 23 june with a total of 9 national olympic committees (nocs) hosting ceremonies in their respective countries: austria, belgium, canada, great britain, greece, portugal, switzerland, uruguay and venezuela.
in 1987, in an effort to encourage all nocs to commemorate and celebrate olympic day, the ioc sport for all commission launched the olympic day run concept with the objective of promoting the practice of participation in sport by men, women and children from all corners of the world and all walks of life, regardless of athletic ability. the first olympic day run was held in 1987, over a distance of 10 km, with 45 participating nocs. in 2006, there were 161 nocs promoting olympic day run to their countrymen.
the olympic day run is usually held during june 17–24 by nocs, with 1.5 km olympic day fun run, 5 km, and 10 km running activities.
wikimedia commons has media related to olympic day run.
get involved in olympic day!
categories: olympic gamesjune events10k runsrecurring sporting events established in 1987
design
toggle recipients subsection
gold olympic order
silver olympic order
bronze olympic order
recipients with missing data
trivia
not to be confused with olympic order in artistic gymnastics.
olympic rings without rims.svg olympic order
gold and silver olympic orders
awarded for contribution to the olympic movement
presented by olympic rings without rims.svg international olympic committee
first award 1975
most wins nadia comăneci romania (twice: 1984, 2004) and carlos arthur nuzman brazil (twice: 1992, 2016)
olympic order and its miniature badge, produced by gde bertoni milano, collection fabio ferrari
the olympic order, established in 1975, is the highest award of the olympic movement. it is awarded for particularly distinguished contributions to the olympic movement, i.e. recognition of efforts worthy of merit in the cause of sport. traditionally, the ioc bestows the olympic order upon the chief national organiser(s) at the closing ceremony of each respective olympic games.
the olympic order was established in may 1975 by the international olympic committee as a successor to the olympic diploma of merit. the olympic order originally had three grades (gold, silver and bronze).
in 1984, at the 87th ioc session in sarajevo (yugoslavia), it was decided that in future there would be no distinction between the silver and bronze order. the gold order would continue to be awarded to heads of state and for exceptional circumstances.
the insignia of the olympic order is in the form of a collar (or chain), in gold, silver or bronze according to grade; the front of the chain depicts the five rings of the olympic movement, flanked on either side by kotinos emblem (olive wreath). a lapel badge, in the form of miniature five rings and kotinos in gold, silver and bronze according to grade, is presented to recipients to wear as appropriate.
dr ulrich feldhoff sporting his chain of the olympic order
the following is a list of recipients of the olympic order. some no longer have their orders, as they have been withdrawn.
this list is incomplete; you can help by adding missing items. (november 2015)
nadia comăneci became one of the youngest recipients of the olympic order in 1984 when she was only 23 years old at the time of her award. she is also one of the two only athletes to be awarded the olympic order twice (1984, 2004), the other one being the brazilian carlos arthur nuzman.
olympic symbols
bertoni, milano
recipients of the olympic order
olympic order in artistic gymnastics
"russia suspended from international soccer, hockey over ukraine attacks". radiofreeeurope/radioliberty.
"speech given by j.a. samaranch, president of the ioc, before awarding the gold medal of the olympic order to pope john paul ii" (pdf). the la84 foundation.
"opening of the 86th session (olympic review no. 186)" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
"facts on indian olympics". facts-about-india.com.
"chronology of the candidature (official report of the games of the xxv olympiad barcelona 1992)" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
mallon, bill; buchanan, ian (2006). historical dictionary of the olympic movement (third ed.). scarecrow press. p. 348. isbn 0810855747.
"uol - brasil online - oscar recebe homenagem do coi 18/07/97 17h39".
"gold olympic order for yeltsin (olympic review no. 303)" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
"presidential visit to southern africa (olympic review no. 326)" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
kahden presidenttikauden kunnia / två presidentperioders heder : mauno koiviston kunniamerkit / mauno koivistos ordnar och utmärkelsetecken (in finnish and swedish). hämeenlinna / tavastehus: hämeen kirjapaino oy. 2018. p. 29. isbn 978-951-53-3708-5.
"first islamic woman named to int'l olympic committee". kyodo news. december 6, 1999.
"jocについて、オリンピック・オーダー [transl.: about the joc, the olympic order]". japanese olympic committee.
"olympic order recipients". olympedia.org.
"eduard shevardnadze". president.gov.ge. the administration of the president of georgia.
"gold olympic order awarded to adolf ogi". ioc. december 13, 2000.
myers, morley. "closing ceremony (sydney 2000)" (pdf). la84foundation.org. p. 79.
mallon, bill; heijmans, jeroen (2011). historical dictionary of the olympic movement (fourth ed.). lanham: scarecrow press. p. 425. isbn 9780810872493.
"ioc eb recommends no participation of russian and belarusian athletes and officials".
lloyd, owen (28 february 2022). "ioc recommends athletes from russia and belarus are banned from all sport, strips putin of olympic order". insidethegames.biz.
"rogge secures olympic presidency".
"samaranch honoured".
"german president visits the olympic museum". ioc. march 11, 2004. archived from the original on april 3, 2015.
"singapore president receives gold olympic order". the official website of the singapore 2010 youth olympic games. .
"s'pore presented with special olympic flag". channel newsasia. .
john huet (march 1, 2010). "thank you and merci vancouver!". ioc.
"germany's bach elected new ioc president".
"spanish sport still shines after failed olympic bid, crown prince says". la prensa. december 18, 2013. archived from the original on april 26, 2014.
"ioc president has private audience with pope francis". ioc.
"xi jinping meetsi with international olympic committee president thomas bach and receives the olympic order in gold". chinaconsulatesf.org.
"colanul olimpic a fost acordat principesei margareta a romaniei - comitetul olimpic si sportiv roman". cosr.ro.
"após jogos, coi homenageia nuzman e paes com comenda da ordem olímpica - gazeta esportiva". www.gazetaesportiva.com.
"ioc president awards the olympic order to pyeongchang 2018 organisers". ioc. february 26, 2018.
"president moon awarded olympic order in gold for pyeongchang games". korea.net. august 30, 2018.
"mauricio macri recibió la "orden olímpica de oro" en la clausura de los juegos olímpicos de la juventud". infobae.com (in spanish). october 19, 2018.
"ioc thanks beijing 2022 for memorable olympic winter games". international olympic committee. .
"złoty order olimpijski dla prezydenta andrzeja dudy [wideo]". www.tvp.info (in polish). .
"olympic awards obtained (olympic review no. 206)" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
"presidential activities (olympic review no. 184)" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
"message from elena mukhina" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
"a courageous lesson from elena mouchina" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
"olympic awards presented at the 87th ioc session (olympic review no. 197)" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
"olympic order (olympic review no. 204)" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
"speaker profile of john brown ao". the celebrity speakers bureau.
"olympic order (92nd ioc session)" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
"olympics 2016: to bid or not to bid". financial express. dec 28, 2003.
"oc's slight hurts legendary commentator". the times of india. oct 17, 2010. archived from the original on november 4, 2012.
"olympic order (93rd ioc session)" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
"olympic order recipients (1386)".
"el coi equipara a induráin con 46 políticos y funcionarios españoles | edición impresa | el país". el país. elpais.com.
"news · international committee of sports for the deaf". deaflympics.com.
"archived copy" (pdf).
"geoff henke". sport australia hall of fame.
"olympic order. (news flash)". olympic review. vol. xxvi, no. 29. october–november 1999. p. 68.
"olympedia – jefri bolkiah, prince abdul hakeem". www.olympedia.org.
"lijst van nederlandse ontvangers van de olympic order noc-nsf". noc-nsf. archived from the original o.
"journalist harry gordon dies, aged 89". the age.
"olympic official mool chand chowhan dies". thaindian news. .
"olympic order award for chowhan". the times of india. march 19, 2003.
"thank you beijing!". ioc. august 25, 2008.
"singaporeans receive formal tributes from ioc". the official website of the singapore 2010 youth olympic games. .
"itu honorary president les mcdonald awarded olympic order". itu. .
"coc president michael chambers awarded the olympic order". olympic.ca.
"georgian luger posthumously awarded". contrance.
"curtain comes down on 123rd ioc session". ioc. july 9, 2011.
"highlights of the week". ioc. february 25, 2011.
"president & 2-time olympic gold medalist gary anderson receives ioc's olympic order". usashooting. archived from the original o.
"thank you, london!". ioc. august 14, 2012.
"lord tupou awarded ioc olympic order | matangi tonga". matangitonga.to. .
"thomas bach, president of ioc handed irina viner the awarded of the olympic order". stadium.ru. retrieved july 19, 2015.
"ioc president travels to santos to present pelé with the olympic order". olympic.org.
"ioc session wraps up meeting by electing new members". olympic.org.
"ioa president n ramachandran bestowed with olympic order award - gktoday".
"ioc president awards the olympic order to pyeongchang 2018 organisers". ioc.
hashimoto, suga, koike to receive ioc's olympic order in gold jiji.com august 9, 2021
"olympic awards" (pdf). olympic review. lausanne, switzerland: the international olympic committee. 107–108: 505–506. september–october 1976.
"olympic order (23rd ioa session)" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
"olympic order (94th ioc session)" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
"olympic order (96th ioc session in tokyo)" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
"olympic order" (pdf). olympic review. september 1992. p. 426.
"olympic order". olympedia.org.
"olympic order (101st ioc session)" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
"olympic order (olympic review no. 313)" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
hain, peter (). "chris de broglio obituary, weightlifter who played a key role in apartheid south africa's expulsion from the olympics". the guardian.
"wolf-dieter montag – curriculum vitae" (pdf). gesellschaft für orthopädisch-traumatologische sportmedizin (in german). p. 4.
"ioc awards olympic order to steffi graf". ioc. december 6, 1999.
"panathlon international - news flash (olympic review - october-november 1999)" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
"around the world - news flash (olympic review - june-july 1999)" (pdf). la84foundation.org.
"the ioc awards the olympic order to alberto tomba". ioc. april 5, 2000.
"alida van den bos vereerd met olympische onderscheiding william k. guegold at ioc congress - for research into olympic music". algemeen dagblad. september 14, 2000.
"the ioc awards the olympic order to prof. albert scharf". ioc. january 8, 2001.
"the ioc awards the olympic order to enrique sanz". ioc. june 8, 2001.
"a.sabonis apdovanotas ioc olimpiniu ordinu". delfi (in lithuanian).
www.moscow2001.olympic.org https://web.archive.org/web/20060512033203/http://www.moscow2001.olympic.org/en/session/jours_14.html. archived from the original on may 12, 2006. {{cite web}}: missing or empty |title= (help)
"naim süleymanoğlu". athletes. the international olympic committee (ioc).
"olympic order awarded to outstanding athletes". ioc. june 19, 2001.
"olympic order awarded to shirley strickland-de la hunty". ioc. august 6, 2002.
"janio grinbergio atminimą įamžins tarptautinis rankinio turnyras". 15min.lt (in lithuanian).
"olympic order awarded to hockey celebrities". ioc. february 19, 2002.
"day 1 - 114th ioc session in mexico city". ioc. november 28, 2002.
"olympic orders presentation". ioc. february 10, 2002.
"ioc awards the olympic order to john williams". ioc. may 1, 2003. archived from the original on december 8, 2013.
"olympic order awarded to adolf ogi". ioc. june 19, 2003.
"the ioc awards the olympic order to mr jean durry". ioc. april 10, 2003.
"olympic order for francoise zweifel". ioc. october 29, 2004.
"a new trophy for nadia comaneci". ioc. march 29, 2004. archived from the original on april 2, 2015.
"nilsen nets olympic honour". fisa. june 4, 2009. archived from the original o.
"fisu mourns loss of eiichi kawatei". international university sports federation. .
wikimedia commons has media related to olympic order.
list of recipients of the olympic order at olympedia.org
olympic rings without rims.svg olympic symbols
olympic rings without rims.svg international olympic committee (ioc)
categories: recipients of the olympic orderawards established in 1975international olympic committeeinternational orders, decorations, and medalsolympic symbolssports trophies and awards
recipients of the olympic cup
the olympic cup.
the olympic cup (french: coupe olympique) is an award given annually by the international olympic committee.
it was instituted by pierre de coubertin in 1906 and is awarded to an institution or association with a record of merit and integrity in actively developing the olympic movement.
its recipients have included amateur sports clubs, schools, newspapers and national sporting administrations, though it is primarily awarded to groups connected with the organization of the olympic games.
1906 — touring club de france
1907 — henley royal regatta
1908 — swedish central association for the promotion of sports
1909 — german gymnastics
1910 — the sokol movement
1911 — touring club italiano
1912 — union of gymnastics societies of france
1913 — hungarian athletic club
1914 — amateur athletic union of america
1915 — rugby school
1916 — confrérie saint-michel de gand
1917 — dutch football association
1918 — sports teams of the allied front
1919 — olympic institute of lausanne
1920 — y.m.c.a. international college, springfield
1921 — danish sports federation
1922 — amateur athletic union of canada
1923 — sports association of catalonia
1924 — athletic and gymnastic federation of finland
1925 — national physical education committee of uruguay
1926 — norwegian skiing federation
1927 — colonel robert m. thomson
1928 — junta nacional mexicana
1929 — ymca world committee
1930 — swiss football and athletic association
1931 — national playing fields association, great britain
1932 — german college of physical education
1933 — swiss federal society of gymnastics
1934 — opera nazionale dopolavoro
1935 — national recreation and park association
1936 — hellenic amateur athletic association
1937 — austrian skating union
1938 — royal academy of physical education of hungary
1939 — strength through joy
1940 — swedish gymnastics
1941 — finnish olympic committee
1942 — william may garland
1943 — argentine olympic committee
1944 — city of lausanne
1945 — norwegian athletics association
1946 — olympic committee of colombia
1947 — j. sigfrid edström, president of the ioc
1948 — central council of physical recreation
1949 — fluminense football club
1950 — belgian olympic committee
1950 — new zealand olympic and british empire games association
1951 — académie des sports, paris
1952 — city of oslo
1953 — city of helsinki
1954 — federal school of gymnastics and sports of switzerland
1955 — organizing committee of the 1954 central american and caribbean games
1955 — organizing committee of the 1955 pan american games
1956 — no award
1957 — silent sports federation of italy
1958 — no award
1959 — panathlon italiano, genoa
1960 — italian university sports centre
1961 — helms hall foundation, los angeles
1962 — organizing committee of the 1961 bolivarian games
1963 — australian british empire and commonwealth games association
1964 — southern californian committee for the olympic games, los angeles
1965 — city of tokyo
1966 — international committee of silent sports
1967 — bolivarian games
1968 — people of mexico city
1969 — polish olympic committee
1970 — organizing committee of th asian games
1971 — organizing committee of the 1971 pan american games
1972 — turkish olympic committee
1972 — city of sapporo
1973 — people of munich
1974 — bulgarian olympic committee
1975 — italian national olympic committee
1976 — czechoslovakian physical culture and sports federation
1977 — olympic committee of ivory coast
1978 — hellenic olympic committee
1979 — organizing committee of the 1978 world rowing championships in new zealand
1980 — ginásio clube portugues
1981 — swiss confederation, international olympic academy
1982 — racing club de france
1983 — puerto rico olympic committee
1984 — organizing committee of the 1983 world championships in athletics
1985 — chinese olympic committee
1986 — city of stuttgart
1988 — l'équipe
1988 — people of australia
1989 — city of seoul
1989 — la gazzetta dello sport
1990 — panellinios athletic club in athens
1991 — japanese olympic committee
1992 — department of savoie
1992 — city of barcelona
1993 — monégasque olympic committee
1994 — french national olympic and sports committee
1994 — people of norway
1995 — korean sport & olympic committee
1996 — city of baden-baden
1997 — no award
1998 — people of nagano
1999 — united nations organization
2000 — city of sydney
2001 — kip keino school, eldoret
2002 — people of salt lake city
2003 — team alinghi
2004 — people of athens
2005 — lake placid winter olympic museum
2006 — people of turin
2007 — lake placid winter olympic museum
2008 — the citizens of beijing
2009 —
2010 — people of singapore
2011 — south african sports confederation and olympic committee and the people of durban
2012 — the citizens of london
2016 — people of the city of rio de janeiro
2018 — people of the city of buenos aires
2022 — people of the people's republic of china
"olympic cup".
international olympic committee – news
lp olympic museum receives honor
grasso, john; mallon, bill; heijmans, jeroen (2015). historical dictionary of the olympic movement (fifth ed.). lanham: rowman & littlefield. p. 680. isbn 9781442248595.
"bocog officials receive ioc's highest honor". the official website of the beijing 2008 olympic games. .
"thank you, london!". the official website of the international olympic committee. .
"porteños recognised with olympic cup". the official website of the international olympic committee. .
ioc official website
list of recipients to 1948
associations
association of national olympic committeeslist of international sports federationsnational olympic committee
chartercupmembersorderpresidentssportssymbols
broadcasting
olympic broadcasting servicesolympic channelolympic channel (american tv channel)
meetings
olympic congresses 13thioc sessions 117th121st123rd125th127th128th129th130th131st132nd133rd134th140th142nd
olympic games portal
categories: olympic culturesports trophies and awardsinternational olympic committeeawards established in 19061906 establishments in france
origins
main ceremonies
toggle main ceremonies subsection
olympic flame lighting
re-igniting the flame
selected relays in detail
olympic cauldron lighting
olympic cauldron designs
coinage
olympic flame
listen to this article
(redirected from olympic torch)
the olympic flame is a symbol used in the olympic movement. it is also a symbol of continuity between ancient and modern games. several months before the olympic games, the olympic flame is lit at olympia, greece. this ceremony starts the olympic torch relay, which formally ends with the lighting of the olympic cauldron during the opening ceremony of the olympic games. the flame then continues to burn in the cauldron for the duration of the games, until it is extinguished during the olympic closing ceremony.
this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (march 2021) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
the marathon tower at the amsterdam olympic stadium, where a symbolic flame burned in 1928
the first time that a symbolic flame made its appearance in the summer olympic games was for the 1928 summer olympics in amsterdam. the main purpose of this fire, placed in a large bowl on top of a slender tower, named "the marathon tower", was to indicate for miles around where in amsterdam the olympic games were being held. this tower was associated with the marathon race and all its elements, including the fire, were an idea of the architect jan wils who also had designed the stadium.
the idea for the olympic flame was derived from ancient greek ceremonies where a sacred fire was kept burning throughout the celebration of the ancient olympics on the altar of the sanctuary of hestia. in ancient greek mythology, fire had divine connotations and it was thought to have been stolen from the gods by prometheus. sacred fires were present at many ancient greek sanctuaries, including those at olympia. every four years, when zeus was honoured at the olympic games, additional fires were lit at his temple and that of his wife, hera. the modern olympic flame is ignited every two years in front of the ruins of the temple of hera.
when the idea of a symbolic fire was introduced during the 1928 summer olympics, an employee of the electric utility of amsterdam lit the first symbolic flame in the marathon tower of the olympic stadium in amsterdam. the olympic flame and the olympic torch relay was first introduced to the summer olympics at the 1936 summer olympics in berlin.
igniting the olympic flame in a dress rehearsal in greece, using the sun's energy
the olympic fire is ignited some weeks or months before the opening ceremony of the olympic games at the main site of the ancient olympics in olympia, greece.
usually eleven women representing the vestal virgins,[notes 1] perform a celebration at the temple of hera in which the fire who will light the first torch of the olympic torch relay is kindled by the light of the sun. its rays are concentrated by a parabolic mirror. an actress acts as the main priestess of the temple and presents the torch and an olive branch to the first relay bearer (usually a greek athlete who is already qualified to compete in that edition) followed by a recitation of a poem by pindar and a dove release to symbolize peace.[citation needed]
at the beginning of the ceremony, the olympic hymn is sung first followed by the national anthem of the country hosting the olympics and the national anthem of greece along with the hoisting of the flags.
olympic torch relay, 1952
olympic torch relay, 1996
olympic torch relay, 2012
the 2014 olympic torch in space during soyuz tma-11m
after the ceremony at olympia the olympic flame first travels greece, and is then transferred during a ceremony in the panathenaic stadium in athens from the hellenic olympic committee to the current year's national olympic committee (noc) and local organizing committee (ocog) hosts.
at the end of the first olympic torch relay, the olympic flame arrives in berlin, 1936
the olympic torch relay, which transports the olympic flame from olympia, greece to the various designated sites of the games, had no ancient precedent and was introduced by carl diem at the 1936 summer olympics in berlin, germany.
at the first olympic torch relay, the flame was transported from olympia to berlin over 3,187 kilometers (1,980 miles) by 3,331 runners in twelve days and eleven nights. there were minor protests in yugoslavia and czechoslovakia on the way, which were suppressed by the local security forces.
in the 1956 melbourne games in australia, local veterinary student barry larkin protested against the relay when he tricked onlookers by carrying a fake flame, consisting of a pair of underpants set on fire in a plum pudding can, attached to a chair leg. he successfully managed to hand over the fake flame to the mayor of sydney, pat hills and escape without being noticed.
the olympic torch travels routes that symbolise human achievement or the history of the host country. although most of the time the torch with the olympic flame is still carried by runners, it has been transported in many different ways. the fire travelled by boat i to cross the english channel and was carried by rowers in canberra as well as by dragon boat in hong kong in 2008.
it was first transported by airplane in 1952 when the flame travelled to helsinki. in 1956, all carriers in the torch relay to stockholm, where the equestrian events were held instead of in melbourne, travelled on horseback.
remarkable means of transportation were used in 1976, when the flame was transformed to a radio signal and transmitted from europe to the new world: heat sensors in athens detected the flame, the signal was sent to ottawa via satellite where it was received and used to trigger a laser beam to re-light the flame. the torch, but not the flame, was taken into space by astronauts in 1996. other unique means of transportation include a native american canoe, a camel, and concorde. the torch has been carried across water; during the french leg of the 1968 winter olympics was carried across the port of marseilles by a diver holding it aloft above the water. in 2000, an underwater flare was used by a diver across the great barrier reef en route to the sydney games. in 2012 it was carried by boat across bristol harbour in the uk and on the front of a london underground train to wimbledon.
in 2004, the first global torch relay was undertaken, a journey that lasted 78 days. the olympic flame covered a distance of more than 78,000 km in the hands of some 11,300 torchbearers, travelling to africa and south america for the first time, visiting all previous and future summer olympic cities, and finally returning to greece for the 2004 summer olympics.
the 2008 summer olympics torch relay spanned all the five continents before proceeding through china. however there was protests against china's human rights record in london where a "ring of steel" was formed around the flame to protect it, but one protester managed to grab hold of the torch while it was being held by television presenter konnie huq. in paris the torch was extinguished at least twice by chinese officials (five times according to french police) so that it could be transported in a bus amid protests while it was being paraded through paris. this eventually led to the cancellation of the relay's last leg in the city. demonstrations were also held in san francisco and the route the torch would take was cut in half.
as a result in 2009, the international olympic committee announced that from the 2010 winter olympics,the future torch relays could be held only within the country hosting the olympics after the initial greek leg was finished. although this rule took effect with the 2010 winter olympics, the organizers of the 2012 summer olympics in london, the 2014 winter olympics in sochi and 2016 summer olympics in rio de janeiro chose to hold their torch relays only in their respective hosting countries of united kingdom,russia and brazil (except for brief stops in the united states, ireland and switzerland respectively). in 2016, ten days before the beginning of the 2016 summer olympics in rio de janeiro, citizens of angra dos reis, a city near rio de janeiro, managed to extinguish the olympic flame during a protest against the city spending money on hosting the olympics despite an economic crisis in brazil.
the olympic torch relay in the host country ends with the lighting of the olympic cauldron during the opening ceremony in the central host stadium of the games. the final carrier is often kept unannounced until the last moment. over the years, it has become a tradition to let a famous athlete of the host nation, former athletes or athletes with significant achievements and milestones be the last runner in the olympic torch relay.
it is not uncommon for the olympic flame to be accidentally or deliberately extinguished during the course of the torch relay (and on at least one occasion the cauldron itself has gone out during the games). to guard against this eventuality, multiple copies of the flame are transported with the relay or maintained in backup locations. when a torch goes out, it is re-lit (or another torch is lit) from one of the backup sources. thus, the fires contained in the torches and olympic cauldrons all trace a common lineage back to the same olympia lighting ceremony.
one of the more memorable extinguishings occurred at the 1976 summer olympics held in montreal, quebec, canada. after a rainstorm doused the olympic flame a few days after the games had opened, an official re-lit the flame using a cigarette lighter. organizers quickly doused it again and re-lit it using a backup of the original flame.
at the 2004 summer olympics, when the olympic flame came to the panathinaiko stadium to start the global torch relay, the night was very windy and the torch, lit by gianna angelopoulos-daskalaki of the athens 2004 organizing committee, blew out due to the wind, but was re-lit from the backup flame taken from the original flame lit at olympia.
in october 2014 in russia, the olympic flame was blown out at the kremlin and was reignited from a security officer's lighter instead of the back up flame.
the current design of the torch has a safeguard built into it: there are two flames inside the torch. there is a highly visible (yellow flame) portion that burns cooler and is more prone to extinguish in wind and rain, but there is also a smaller hotter (blue in the candle's wick) flame akin to a pilot light hidden inside the torch which is protected from wind and rain and is capable of relighting the cooler, more visible portion if it is extinguished. the fuel contained inside the torch is able to keep it lit for approximately 15 minutes before it would be extinguished.
selected relays in detail: list of olympic torch relays
2016 summer paralympics torch relay
the flame is transported from greece to the host country where the flame is transported by torch around the host nation to the main stadium.
paavo nurmi lighting the olympic flame in helsinki in 1952
during the opening ceremony the final bearer of the torch runs towards the cauldron, often placed at the top of a grand staircase, and then uses the torch to start the flame in the stadium. the climactic transfer of the olympic flame from the final torch to the cauldron at the central host stadium marks the symbolic commencement of the games.
as with being the final runner of the olympic torch relay, it is considered to be a great honor to light the olympic cauldron, and in the same way it has become a tradition to select notable athletes to conduct this part of the ceremony. on other occasions, the people who lit the cauldron in the stadium are not famous but nevertheless symbolize olympic ideals. japanese runner yoshinori sakai was born on the day of the atomic bombing of hiroshima. he was chosen for the role to symbolize japan's postwar reconstruction and peace, opening the 1964 tokyo games. at the 1976 games in montreal, two teenagers — one from the french-speaking part of the country, one from the english-speaking part — symbolized the unity of canada.
at the 2012 games in london, the torch was carried by sir steve redgrave to a group of seven young british athletes (callum airlie, jordan duckitt, desiree henry, katie kirk, cameron macritchie, aidan reynolds and adelle tracey) — each nominated by a british olympic champion — who then each lit a single tiny flame on the ground, igniting 204 copper petals before they converged to form the cauldron for the games.
an asian man in red and white athletic shirt and shorts, and wearing athletic shoes, is suspended by wires in the air while holding a lit torch. in the background, a large crowd in a stadium can be seen, as well as two blurred flags.
li ning, a chinese gymnast, lit the olympic flame during the opening ceremony of the 2008 summer olympics after "flying" around the stadium on wires.: list of people who have lit the olympic cauldron
the first well-known athlete to light the cauldron in the stadium was the ninefold olympic champion paavo nurmi, who excited the home crowd in helsinki in 1952. in 1968, enriqueta basilio became the first woman to light the olympic cauldron at the olympic games in mexico city.
perhaps one of the most spectacular of olympic cauldron lighting ceremonies took place at the 1992 summer olympics, when paralympic archer antonio rebollo lit the cauldron by shooting a burning arrow over it, which ignited gas rising from the cauldron. unofficial videos seem to indicate that the flame was lit from below. twenty years after the barcelona games one of those involved said that the flame was "switched on" ("se encendió con un botón", in spanish). two years later, the olympic fire was brought into the stadium of lillehammer by a ski jumper. in beijing 2008, li ning "ran" on air around the interior edge of the beijing national stadium's roof, and lit a cauldron attached to it.
the cauldron and the pedestal are always the subjects of unique and often dramatic design. these also tie in with how the cauldron is lit during the opening ceremony.
in los angeles in 1984, rafer johnson lit a wick at the top of the archway after having climbed a big flight of steps. the flame flared up a pipe, through the olympic rings, and on up the side of the tower to ignite the cauldron.
in atlanta in 1996, the cauldron was an artistic scroll decorated in red and gold. it was lit by muhammad ali, using a mechanical, self-propelling fuse ball that transported the flame up a wire from the stadium to its cauldron. at the 1996 summer paralympics, the scroll was lit by paraplegic climber mark wellman, hoisting himself up a rope to the cauldron.
for the 2000 summer olympics in sydney, cathy freeman walked across a circular pool of water and ignited the cauldron through the water, surrounding herself within a ring of fire. the planned spectacular climax to the ceremony was delayed by the technical glitch of a computer switch that malfunctioned, causing the sequence to shut down by giving a false reading. this meant that the olympic flame was suspended in mid-air for about four minutes, rather than immediately rising up a water-covered ramp to the top of the stadium. when it was discovered what the problem was, the program was overridden and the cauldron continued up the ramp, where it finally rested on a tall silver pedestal.
for the 2002 winter olympics in salt lake city, utah, united states, the cauldron was lit by the members of the winning 1980 us hockey team. after being skated around the centre ice rink there in the stadium, the flame was carried up a staircase to the team members, who then lit a wick of sorts at the bottom of the cauldron tower which set off a line of flames that travelled up inside the tower until it reached the cauldron at the top which ignited. this cauldron was the first to use glass and incorporated running water to prevent the glass from heating and to keep it clean.
for the 2004 summer olympics in athens, the cauldron was a giant reproduction of the olympic torch that that year was based on an olive leaf which bowed down to accept the flame from windsurfer nikolaos kaklamanakis.
in the 2006 winter olympics in turin, stefania belmondo placed the flame on an arched lighting apparatus, which initiated a series of fireworks before lighting the top of the 57-metre-high (187 ft) olympic cauldron, the highest in the history of the winter olympic games.
in the 2008 summer olympics in beijing, the cauldron resembled the end of a scroll and it was also a giant version of the torch used in that year's relay. but the design was lifted out from the stadium rim and spiralled upwards. it was lit by li ning, who was raised to the rim of the stadium by wires. he ran around the rim of the stadium while suspended and as he ran, an unrolling scroll was projected showing film clips of the flame's journey around the world from greece to beijing. as he approached the cauldron, he lit an enormous wick, which then transferred the flame to the cauldron. the flame then spiralled up the structure of the cauldron before lighting it at the top.
in the 2010 winter olympics at vancouver, a team of athletes (catriona le may doan, steve nash, nancy greene and wayne gretzky) were to simultaneously light the base of poles, which would then carry the flames upwards to the cauldron. however, only three out of four poles came out of the ground due to mechanical problems, resulting in inadvertently excluding le may doan from lighting it with the other three athletes. because the site of the ceremonies - bc place - was a domed stadium, gretzky was sent hidden via the back of a pick-up truck to a secondary site — the vancouver convention centre which served as the international broadcast centre for these olympics — to light the outdoor cauldron of a similar design located indoor,but taller and bigger the then placed in the stadium, as olympic rules state that the flame must be in public view for the entirety of the olympics. in the closing ceremonies, le may doan took part on the starting of closing ceremony in a joke about the mechanical glitch, and she was able to light the fully raised fourth pole and have the indoor cauldron relit.
at the 2012 summer olympics in london, the flame was passed to a group of seven young british athletes (callum airlie, jordan duckitt, desiree henry, katie kirk, cameron macritchie, aidan reynolds, and adelle tracey) who then each lit a single tiny flame on the ground, igniting 204 petals (one for each delegation in the games) that rose up to form a single cauldron. the cauldron that traditionally flames continuously from the opening until the closing ceremony was temporarily extinguished (the flame itself was transferred to a lantern) prior to the athletics events while the cauldron was moved to the southern side of the stadium. it was relit by austin playfoot, one of final torchbearers from the 1948 summer olympics. in contrast to the cauldrons in vancouver, the cauldron was not visible to the public outside the stadium. instead, monitors had been placed throughout the olympic park showing the public live footage of the flame.
for the 2014 winter olympics in sochi, russia, the cauldron was situated directly outside fisht olympic stadium, the ceremonial venue for the games. after the torch's lap around the stadium, triple gold medalists irina rodnina and vladislav tretiak carried the torch outside the stadium to light a larger version of the "celebration cauldron" used in the main torch relay at the center of the olympic park. a line of gas jets carried the flame from the celebration cauldron up the main cauldron tower, eventually lighting it at the top.
for the 2016 summer olympics in rio de janeiro, brazil, a scenic cauldron was lit inside the maracanã stadium, the ceremonial venue for the games, by vanderlei de lima. as part of these games' appeal towards environmental protection, organizers deliberately chose to use a basic design with a smaller flame than past cauldrons. to compensate for the smaller cauldron,is accompanied by a larger kinetic sculpture designed by anthony howe.as the public could not have direct contact with the symbol four years earlier, the organizing committee decided to remove the oficial cauldron from the olympic stadium and allocated the official cauldron in the candelária church plaza an the cauldron was lited following the opening ceremony ended.
for the 2018 winter olympics in pyeongchang, south korea, the flame was eventually handed to yuna kim, who was at the top of a set of steps. she then lit a wick of sorts, which lit a large metal flaming pillar with thirty parts, representing the 30 years as a time tunnel between the two olympic games held in the republic of korea. the pillar rose to the top of the cauldron, lighting it. the cauldron was a large white sculpture with a large sphere on the top, acting for the cauldron. the cauldron's design was inspired by joseon white porcelain.
for the 2020 summer olympics in tokyo, japan, the flame was handed to naomi osaka, who stood in front of a large mountain-like structure resembling mount fuji. at the top of the mountain was a large closed ball, resembling the sun. this ball unfolded as a disco ball that revealed many petals of a flower representing hope,energy and vitality, forming the cauldron. osaka then walked up a set of steps revealed as the ball unfolded and lit the cauldron. just like the vancouver and rio games, two cauldrons were made. one scenographic was located inside the olympic stadium and the official outside, which was located on the ariake west canal bridge.
the organizing committee of the 2022 winter olympics held in beijing, chose to eschew the olympic cauldron entirely, and used a small structure with the final two torchbearers— the skiers zhao jiawen and dinigeer yilamujiang—fitted the last torch into a 3-d small structure at the centre of a large snowflake, constructed from crystalline placards with the names of each competing 91 national olympic committees. another two cauldrons where lit after, at the two another games' clusters, and the official cauldron was on olympic stadium exterior area.
traditional olympic cauldrons often employ a simple bowl-on-pedestal design, such as the cauldron used for the 1936 summer olympics
olympic cauldron at moscow 1980
kim won-tak (athlete), chong son-man (teacher) und son mi-jong (dance student) during the lighting of the olympic cauldron at 1988 summer olympics
olympic cauldron at 1992 summer olympics
olympic and paralympic cauldron at atlanta 1996 games
olympic cauldron at athens 2004 during the opening ceremony
olympic cauldron at turin 2006
olympic cauldron at beijing 2008 during the opening ceremony
public cauldron of vancouver 2010
more artistic and abstract designs for cauldrons, including the 2012 summer olympics cauldron, have also been used.
cauldrons can also take on monolithic forms, an example of which being the "cauldron tower" used for sochi 2014
the rio 2016 games had a inovative cauldron,who featured a kinetic sculpture with a small flame.
the rio 2016 public cauldron in downtown rio de janeiro
one of the three public flames of beijing 2022
after being lit the flame in the olympic cauldron continues to burn during the games, until the closing ceremony, when it is finally put out symbolizing the official end of the games.
the olympic flame has been used as a symbol and a main motif numerous times in different commemorative coins. a recent example was the 50th anniversary of the helsinki olympic games commemorative coin, minted in 2002. in the obverse, the olympic flame above the earth can be seen. finland is the only country highlighted; it was the host of the 1952 games.
eternal flame
paralympic flame
flame of hope (special olympics)
asian games torch, a torch relay associated with the asian games
pan american torch, a torch relay associated with the pan american games
king's baton relay, an analogous relay associated with the commonwealth games
universiade torch, a torch relay associated with the universiade
the roman vesta is derived from the greek goddess hestia. hestia's rituals at the founding of a new settlement also included the transfer of a continuous flame from the founding city.
"beijing 2008 olympic games - history of the olympic games". encyclopedia britannica.
"ninth olympiad, being the official report of the olympic games of 1928 celebrated at amsterdam. netherlands olympic committee". la84 foundation digital library.
"report" (pdf). official website of the olympic movement.
(secondary) jean-pierre vernant - hestia - hermes : the religious expression of space and movement among the greeks archive at the wayback machin
"amsterdam 1928". olympic.org.
"olympic torch relay history". london 2012 olympic games. archived from the original o.
ranger, a. "the panathenaic". /www.panathenaicstadium.gr. panathenaic stadium 2011.
"hitler's berlin games helped make some emblems popular". sports &gt; olympics. the new york times. archived from the original o.
adolf hitler saw the link with the ancient games as the perfect way to illustrate his belief that classical greece was an aryan forerunner of the modern german reich. (see hines, nico (7 april 2008). "who put the olympic flame out?". timesonline.co.uk. london.)
"olympic underwear relay". the birdman. archived from the original o.
stephen fry (2007). qi presents: strictly come duncing (dvd). warner music entertainment.
turpin, adrian (8 august 2004). "olympics special: the lost olympians (page 1)". find articles, originally the independent on sunday. archived from the original o.
施幸余乘龍舟傳送火炬 (in chinese). singtao.[dead link]
winn, l.: olympic design: torches & cauldrons archive at the wayback machine. sports illustrated.
"montréal". the olympic museum lausanne. international olympic committee. archived from the original o.
the olympic torch relay: olympic torch relay highlights
"report" (pdf). 2008. archived from the original (pdf) o.
"torch timeline". bbc news online.
"olympic torch technology". australian broadcasting corporation. 2000. australian runner, ron clarke carried a spectacular, fizzling flame into the melbourne olympic stadium in 1956 only to miss out on the ceremony having his magnesium burns dressed.
lews, paul; kelso, paul (7 april 2008). "thousands protest as olympic flame carried through london". the guardian.
(in french) "flamme olympique: ce qui s'est vraiment passé à paris" archive at the wayback machine, l'express
"paris protests force olympic flame to be extinguished". thisislondon.co.uk. archived from the original o.
"china condemns olympic torch disruptions" archive at the wayback machine, france 24
"paris protests force cancellation of torch relay". msnbc.com. archived from the original o.
san francisco authorities forced to shorten torch relay route
zinser, lynn (27 march 2009). "i.o.c. bars international torch relays". the new york times.
torches and torch relays of the olympic winter games from oslo 1952 to pyeongchang 2018
the 2012 london games torch relay: an inspiring journey
"protesters put out the olympic torch in rio".
withnall, adam (7 october 2013). "got a light? olympic flame goes out in 'wind tunnel' at kremlin - and is reborn on the sly via a security officer's cigarette lighter". the independent. london. archived from the original o.
"the olympic torch". entertainment. how stuff works.
official report of the 1992 summer olympics, vol september 2009 at the wayback machine, p. 70 (confirming arrow lit the gas above the cauldron) and p. 69 (time-lapse photo of lighting; the arrow passed through the upper reaches of the flame).
mathews, john (15 september 2000). "ceremonial hall of shame". bbc sport.
la flecha olimpica no entró!, archived from the original o
lighting of the cauldron, another unofficial recording on youtube.
"eta puso una bomba en el palau sant jordi en los juegos de 1992". la vanguardia.
1996 atlanta opening ceremonies — lighting of the cauldron on youtube
2004 picture, bbc news
olympic opening ceremony torino 2006 - light of passion on youtube
olympic (8 august 2019). "full opening ceremony from beijing 2008 - throwback thursday" – via youtube.
taylor, matthew (30 july 2012). "olympic cauldron relit after move to southern end of stadium". the guardian. london.
"diminutive rio 2016 cauldron complemented by massive kinetic sculpture". dezeen.
"sun sculpture and cauldron light up olympic ceremony.". the telegraph. archived from the original o.
"formerly homeless boy who lit olympic cauldron now has 'beautiful life'". cbc news.
"uyghur athlete lights olympic cauldron as beijing 2022 officially opens". inside the games.
chappell, bill (4 february 2022). "the beijing winter olympics' cauldron lighting made a political statement". npr.
volker kluge. 1997–2004. olympische sommerspiele – die chronik. five volumes. sportverlag except vol. 5 (südwest-verlag). isbn 3-328-00715-6; isbn 3-328-00740-7; isbn 3-328-00741-5; isbn 3-328-00830-6; isbn 3-517-06732-6.
listen to this article (15 minutes)
15:30
spoken wikipedia icon
this audio file was created from a revision of this article date, and does not reflect subsequent edits.
(audio help · more spoken articles)
media related to olympic flame at wikimedia commons
olympic flame lighting ceremony for pyeongchang 2018 on youtube
olympic flame lighting ceremony for rio 2016 on youtube
official site of the olympic movement - images and information on every game since 1896
ioc brochure on the history of olympic flame (1 mb pdf)
torchrelay.net - torch relay coverage. includes torchbearer profiles, photos, videos, and more.
athens info guide - a list of past torches
sondre norheim - on the three occasions when the olympic flame was lit in morgedal
bbc article on the history of the torch
the nazi olympics: berlin 1936 - online exhibition
olympic, paralympic, and youth olympic torch relays
categories: olympic flameolympic symbolsceremonial flamesathletic culture based on greek antiquitysymbols introduced in 1928dutch inventions
